Demme was able to portray the madness of creating two assassins for
political gain. The antagonist in Demme’s version is the corpo-
rate/industrial complex seeking dominance. Although this version is
layered, the performances are realistic, which relegates this “The
Manchurian Candidate” to an entertaining cautionary tale.
    On the other hand, the original “The Manchurian Candidate”
directed by John Frankenheimer exemplifies great directing. In this
version, Cold War politics provides the core struggle. Communists
create an assassin to help them take over the United States, their
capitalist rival state. The Cold War plot is transformed into an emo-
tionally compelling nightmare by positioning the struggle inside
one family. Raymond Shaw, the main character who is brainwashed              319
to be an assassin, is forever the powerless son. The antagonist is his
mother, who presents herself as a patriot but is in fact the commu-
nist mole who controls Raymond and moves him toward his assign-
ment of killing the presidential candidate. Her power over her son
destroys his life, and this personal tragedy becomes a national
tragedy. Made in 1962, this film illustrates how politics and personal
life can clash to the detriment of the family and the nation.
Frankenheimer’s visual style and ironic deployment of visual obser-
vations about race relations, interpersonal relations, and national
rivalries even between Allies make “The Manchurian Candidate” a
powerful example of what great directing can be.
    The director deploys three tools to create the director’s idea: text
interpretation, direction of the actors’ performances, and camera
choices that create editing opportunities to realize the director’s
idea. Let’s look at each of these individually.
    In Chapter 4, I described how Michael Mann in “Collateral”
interpreted Los Angeles as a city where individuals are alone. They
cannot count on people or organizations within the environment to
help them. This is a more neutral presentation of Los Angeles than
Robert Altman’s in “Short Cuts,” and it is more neutral but in the
opposite direction than the view set forth by Stanley Donen and
Gene Kelly about the city of dreams in “Singin’ in the Rain.” My
point here is that in his interpretation of the text in “Collateral,”
Mann used his depiction of the city to make his main character, a
taxi driver, even more defenseless against the hit man who is a pas-
senger in his cab. Mann’s depiction of the city is an interpretive
strategy that deepens our experience of the narrative.


                                                                Conclusion
