a noneditorial experience of a chapter in Australia’s military history.
Even from the perspective of Australian films, “The Lighthorsemen”
differs from two earlier Australian films dealing with war. Bruce
Beresford’s “Breaker Morant” (1980) deals with an incident in the
Boer War, and Peter Weir’s “Gallipoli” (1982) deals with the Gallipoli
landing in 1915. Both films humanize the main characters who will
be sacrificed in the course of acting as soldiers during war, and both
films characterize the British command of Australian troops as the
reason for those sacrifices. Both films, in this sense, view war as cruel
and the killer of the innocents, those Australian sons, who for various
reasons found themselves fighting for king and country and then
needlessly sacrificed not for country but for king. The enemy is not        35
the Boers or the Turks or the Germans. In both films, the enemy is
much closer: It is the colonial rule of the British.
    Returning to narrative intent, “Breaker Morant” and “Gallipoli”
do tell a clear story but each tells a layered story and not simply
because they offer up an anti-war position. Rather, in the case of
“Breaker Morant,” the narrative about atrocities against the Boers
and the consequences for three participating soldiers reveals atroci-
ties on both sides. Indeed, the implication of the narrative is that
war breeds atrocities, and the British making peace with the
defeated Boers required sacrifices—in this case, three human sacri-
fices. In the case of “Gallipoli,” the focus is on the sacrifice of a
beautiful, idealistic Australian generation in a battle that was ill con-
ceived by the Admiralty in London. The film is an argument against
colonialism, as it illustrates that the colonized (Australia) can only
be destroyed in service of the colonial relationship. Although each
film has a romantic layer, neither dwells exclusively on that layer, as
in the case of Wincer’s “The Lighthorsemen.”
    I now turn to the issue of surprise. As I mentioned earlier, audi-
ences want to be surprised by plot and the behavior of the charac-
ters. The characters in “The Lighthorsemen” are not surprising.
Only the intelligence officer (Anthony Andrews) twists away from
expectations. Initially, we are led to believe he may be a German
spy. That twist is short lived, and the best we can say about his char-
acterization is that he is eccentric, although that eccentricity and
affectation are part and parcel of intelligence officers, a profession
that traffics in subterfuge. Beyond this character, there are no sur-
prises in the characterization.


                                                  The Competent Director
