Introduction

Margarethe Von Trotta was one of the German writers who were
active and important in what has come to be called New German
cinema of the 1970s. The filmmakers were very different in intent
and style but like the New Wave ten years earlier they energetically
pursued a creative agenda very different from the filmmakers of
the previous generation. Rainer Werner Fassbinder embraced
melodrama as his genre of choice. Wim Wenders favored existential
narratives that mixed realistic characters with fable-like events or
fable-like character with real events. Werner Herzog was only
interested in the fable, while Margarethe Von Trotta and her               261
partner/husband Volker Schlondorff were most attracted to a radical
or political treatment of events or people.
   Von Trotta has been an important filmmaker for 30 years. Her
work initially was principally as the writer of Schlondorff’s films,
such as “The Sudden Wealth of the Poor People of Kalmbach.”
In 1975, she co-directed with Schlondorff “The Lost Honor of
Katharina Blum.” She appeared in a major role in and co-directed
with Schlondorff “Coup de Grace” (1980). In 1977, she solely
directed “The Second Awakening of Crista Klages.” She directed
her most famous film, “Marianne and Juliane,” known as “The
German Sisters” in Europe, in 1981. Since then she has made
numerous theatrical and television films, the most prominent being
“The Sisters of Happiness” (1985), “Rosa Luxemburg” (1994), “The
Promise” (1995), and “Rosenstrasse” (2004).
   Because her base of operation shifted from Germany to Italy, she
has somehow received a treatment similar to the Polish filmmaker
Agnieszka Holland, a kind of snub that has made each filmmaker
a “European” filmmaker or an “international” filmmaker rather
than a German or Polish film director. I attribute such treatment
to each being a female director. Roland Emmerich and Paul
Verhoeven have not had the same kind of experience although they
went to Hollywood. They are still accepted as German and Dutch
directors as well.
   Before we look at a number of excerpts from Von Trotta’s work,
a few observations will contextualize her director’s idea. First and
foremost is the observation that Von Trotta, like Billy Wilder before
her, is principally a writer and it is her writing that shapes all other

  Margarethe Von Trotta: Historical Life and Personal Life Intersect
