its practitioners. All of Lubitsch’s lovers are imperfect characters.
Gaston Monescu is a thief. Leon d’Algout is a scoundrel. Joseph Tura
is vanity personified, and Alfred Kralik is stiff and too serious for
his own good. The women fare little better. Clara Novack is hot
tempered, as is Lily. Ninotchka is as serious as Kralik, and Maria Tura
is far more vain than her famous husband.
    The consequence is that Lubitsch is telling stories about realistic
characters finding out that in their lives the only important thing, or
the most important thing, is to love and be loved. All else—money,
position, status—means very little. The pursuit of love is not only
crucial; it is essential. When we experience the Lubitsch characters,
we join them in the pleasure of the pursuit of love.                       183


Directing the Actors

Lubitsch cast for charm, sophistication, and the capacity for com-
edy. Often this meant hiring theater actors (Herbert Marshall,
Miriam Hopkins, Melvyn Douglas) and vaudeville performers (Jack
Benny). In casting his female roles, the greater the glamour the bet-
ter. Star power on the order of Greta Garbo, Marlene Dietrich, and
Carole Lombard set the standard for a Lubitsch film. Lubitsch also
employed ensemble performers (Edward Everett Horton, Charles
Ruggles, Sig Rumann) to flesh out his cast. Another dimension of a
Lubitsch cast is its ethnicity. Lubitsch films were often set in
Europe, so Lubitsch cast for faces that would look at home in Paris,
Venice, Moscow, or Budapest.
    Characteristic of Lubitsch performances is the range he asked of
his performers. Greta Garbo in “Ninotchka” had to be a Soviet ice
queen as well as a romantic heroine who could laugh. James Stewart
had to be serious, stiff, pliant, and romantic in “The Shop Around
the Corner.” Jack Benny had to be a great performer and jealous hus-
band in “To Be or Not To Be.” Melvyn Douglas had to be a
scoundrel and a lover in short order in “Ninotchka.” This meant uti-
lizing actors with the flexibility and emotional range to shift gears in
a performance. It also meant hiring actors who had the sense of tim-
ing to make these shifts convincing. Lubitsch needed confident
actors who trusted their director and his interpretation of the mate-
rial. He was a director who had a very clear sense of direction for his


                              Ernst Lubitsch: The Life Force of Romance
