mean he is evil. He is just different. The antagonist, Adam, equates
          being different with bad. Just as he had never understood his wife,
          Kate, he cannot seem to understand his son Cal. This is the tragedy
          of this version of East of Eden. Viewing those who are different as
          evil is narrow minded, and Adam’s lack of openness leads to tragic
          consequences for him and his son Aron.
              The second version of East of Eden was a four-hour TV movie
          directed by Harvey Hart. In this version, the details of the genera-
          tional family saga have become the plot. The subtext of East of
          Eden as a struggle of values was set aside, and the story of Charles
          and Adam, Cal and Aron, and the linchpin that joins these two
78        stories, Kate, becomes central. In fact, Kate’s story is the strongest
          element. Biblical references are made, but the movie gives no sense
          that the struggle of good (Adam) versus evil (Kate) is effectively
          embedded in the Cal–Aron story. These brothers have become the
          victims of their narcissistic mother, Kate, and confused father,
          Adam. Their respective fates do not seem to be the result of any
          unresolved familial issues.
              Recently, production of a third version of East of Eden was
          announced, with Ron Howard as its director. Will Howard go back to
          the Steinbeck notion of biblical archetypes, Cain and Abel, repre-
          senting the two sides of the American character? Will the story be an
          intergenerational struggle? Will it be a female–male (Kate–Adam)
          struggle? Whether it represents east–west, intergenerational, or
          female–male conflict, what is clear is that the East of Eden novel
          lends itself to varied interpretations. To understand how to access a
          variety of interpretations, we must take a look at what directors con-
          sider when making their text interpretations.


          Interior/Exterior

          The first decision directors must make is whether to approach a
          story as an interior, psychological story or as an exterior story rely-
          ing on a series of events out in the world. Interior stories are pre-
          occupied by psychological aspects of their characters, such as
          their inner life, spiritual values, or search for deeper values or
          meaning. When Somerset Maugham wrote The Razor’s Edge in
          1935, he really wanted to explore the loss of meaning resulting


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
