Point of view is always important, and point of view tends to be
           subjective. To punctuate a point of view, Polanski will use a strate-
           gic long shot. In the scene that leads up to the deportation in “The
           Pianist,” Polanski has focused on the Szpilman family as well as
           young and old people. A young woman has suffocated her baby to
           avoid deportation. An old man counsels that they are not going to a
           labor camp—why would the Germans rely on women, children,
           and old men for labor? They intend to kill all of them. The
           Szpilmans try unsuccessfully to remain a family. During the rush to
           the train, Szpilman escapes. All of these scenes are detailed with
           close-ups. Once the train has pulled out, however, Polanski cut to
230        an extreme long shot of the yard. We see only the artifacts, belong-
           ings abandoned by their owners—only things, no people. The long
           shot punctuates what has happened here, and it is as powerful as
           any close-up used elsewhere in the film.
               Polanski achieved a similar result when he used long shots of the
           apartment in “Rosemary’s Baby.” The emptiness of the apartment
           and its coldness remind us of the absence of Guy, her husband. It
           also reminds us of the terrible events that have occurred in this
           building, events that contextualize what will soon happen to
           Rosemary. Beside the long shot, Polanski also relied on the power-
           ful cutaway—in “Rosemary’s Baby,” the chocolate mousse that will
           transport Rosemary away from the rape experience to follow; in
           “The Pianist,” the execution of a mother as she asks about the des-
           tination of the Jews; in “Chinatown,” the broken tail light that will
           lead Gittes toward a sense of betrayal by Mrs. Mulwray; in “Tess,”
           the jewelry of Angel’s grandmother that he gives Tess just before her
           confession. The cutaway always introduces a new idea, but in
           Polanski’s work that new idea always leads to the lonely space the
           character will soon occupy. If it conveys a sense of the optimistic, as
           in the jewelry shot in “Tess,” the optimism does not last and in that
           sense the shot is bitterly ironic in the light of what shortly follows.
               Polanski rarely relies on editing to convey the sensibility of dread
           and aloneness that permeates his work. More often he relies on
           camera placement and shot selection, including his powerful use of
           specific cutaways. He also tries to elevate his story to a mythic level.
           Consider the visual character of the rape in “Rosemary’s Baby.”
           Consider also the role of Chinatown as not only the location for the
           last scene but also a metaphor for the confluence of passion and


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
