Jean-Pierre Jeunet’s work in “Delicatessen” and “City of Lost
       Children” is a tribute to the power of art direction. These post-
       apocalyptic fables are frightening and exciting as they capture an
       imaginative world where humans have either come to their end or
       in the darkness have found a new beginning.
           Samuell and Jeunet represent one extreme in the use of art
       direction. At the opposite end of the spectrum is the realist
       option. Lynne Ramsay’s “Ratcatcher,” a portrait of hellish poverty
       in 1970s Glasgow, emphasizes the harshness of poverty and the
       entrapment it represents, particularly for the young main charac-
       ter. Life is a drab gray-blue, except for accidental color or the
96     color of a new suburban home that is too elusive for the
       main character and his family; otherwise, flatness, grays, and
       blues pervade the objects, the rooms, and the life of the main
       character.
           Of course, most directors choose an art direction strategy some-
       where in between Jeunet and Ramsay, but the more defined and
       specific the art direction strategy, the more powerful the nonverbal
       impact of the director’s film. Consider the ennobling sense of the
       land and the people in Walter Salles’ “The Motorcycle Diaries”
       or the flat television sitcom look of Los Angeles in David Russell’s
       “I Heart Huckabees,” a perfect metaphor for the existentially
       despairing main character. The key here is that the director must
       have an idea of his narrative goal. From that point, the look of the
       environments and the appearance of the characters contribute to
       the nonverbal expression of the character’s idea. When directors
       ignore art direction, they deny the audience the richly layered nar-
       rative experience they deserve.


       Sound

       Sound is a production and post-production consideration. Although
       many of the creative sound decisions are generated in post-
       production, it is nevertheless important for the director to be aware
       of how sound can further the director’s idea. As in the case of light
       and art direction, it is useful to think of sound on a natural versus
       dramatic continuum. Sound in the first case is used to support
       the recognizability and veracity of the characters and settings. At the


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
