benign presence. A soldier kissing his cross before he shoots a
German machine gunner tells us so much about the soldier in
“Saving Private Ryan.” Spielberg uses these specific details for plot
and characterization purposes.
    Maintaining a level of excitement in a film is a by-product of the
subject as well as the dynamism of the filmic approach taken. All
four of these excerpts are exciting to watch because they get the
adrenalin flowing. Excitement is created by camera movement
combined with action paced for emotional punctuation. Few
sequences are as exciting as the chase in “Raiders of the Lost Ark.”
Because the odds are obviously against Indiana Jones, the thrill of
his overcoming them is added. Overcoming such odds, however,             257
must be plausible, so Spielberg carefully takes us through each step.
A simple, logical progression is not enough, though. Each step has
to be more dangerous than the last, each adversary more skilled
than the last. In the “Raiders of the Lost Ark” chase, the commander
is the strongest and most dangerous adversary for Indiana Jones, so
he is saved for the last. Close quarters and Indiana Jones’ injury all
raise the stakes for this final confrontation. This is a great action
sequence in that it is exciting in much the same way as a child’s sur-
prise checkers victory or a high school sports victory is exciting.
Nothing is as thrilling as a childhood victory in an adult world. This
is precisely what happens when Indiana Jones takes over the
German truck.
    Finally, the combination of pace and point of view is key to an
affecting film experience. Few sequences are as powerful as the
24-minute D-Day landing sequence in “Saving Private Ryan.” I have
already mentioned the narrative progression of the scene earlier in
the chapter. Here, we focus on a few of Spielberg’s ideas in the
sequence. The first is the chaos of the landing experience. To cre-
ate a sense of chaos, Spielberg used a lot of camera movement.
Some movement, as in the landing craft, is fluid from the back of
the craft to the front. On shore, the movement becomes more
chaotic. Spielberg used handheld cameras with lots of jostling in
the movement to establish the pace and a sense of danger on the
beach. Jump cutting, lots of close-ups, and sharp changes in sound
levels all contribute to the sense of chaos.
    Spielberg’s next idea was to suggest that that the beach was not
simply dangerous but rather was a killing field where the majority


                                   Steven Spielberg: Childhood Forever
