Introduction

Many directors are referred to as a “man’s director,” and many
directors have a poetic style, but no filmmaker has dealt with men
or visual poetry in quite the same way John Ford did. In short, Ford
made films about men—famous men such as Abraham Lincoln
(“Young Mr. Lincoln”) and Wyatt Earp (“My Darling Clementine”)
and simple men such as Tom Joad (“The Grapes of Wrath”). Other
directors have also gravitated to men and male themes. Howard
Hawks (“Only Angels Have Wings,” “Red River”) was interested in
a man’s rite of passage, that test in life that makes him a man. Raoul
Walsh (“Santa Fe Trail”) was interested in men as roustabouts              135
(“The Uncontrollable Male”), and Henry Hathaway (“Nevada
Smith”) was interested in the passions that drive male behavior.
John Ford, on the other hand, was interested in all things that made
men noble. For Ford, a noble character and behavior made men
both big and small, heroic in their extraordinary and ordinary lives.
    This idea about heroism was not as individualistic as the Hawks
or Hathaway heroes. For Ford’s heroes, their family or community
(including the military), as well as ethnic background, made them
who they were. Ford’s characters all came from somewhere, and
that somewhere (be it Ireland or Illinois) made them who they
were. Ford’s visual poetics contextualized the behavior of his heroic
characters. It gave their goals and their passions an equivalent visual
ground.
    Ford’s heroes were not humorless, although they were formal and
in a sense old fashioned. Their struggles proceeded in ritualistic
rather than realistic fashion. Amplifying inner feeling rather than
explaining it was Ford’s mission as a director. The consequence is a
series of films unparalleled in their impact on other filmmakers.
Orson Welles was inspired by “Stagecoach” (1939), Lindsay Anderson
was inspired by “My Darling Clementine” (1947) and “They Were
Expendable” (1946), and the list goes on.
    John Ford began his career as a director in 1917 and made his last
film in 1966. His important films are dominated by Westerns: “The
Iron Horse” (1924), “Stagecoach” (1939), “My Darling Clementine”
(1946), “She Wore a Yellow Ribbon” (1949), “The Searchers” (1956),
and “The Man Who Shot Liberty Valence” (1962). Commercial
and industry recognition, however, came from his non-Westerns:

                                           John Ford: Poetry and Heroism
