Examples of sequences that have served as set pieces would
include the execution of the three French soldiers for cowardice in
“Paths of Glory.” Here, the ritual of death is given a macabre dignity.
The knowledge that these men are not cowards but are scapegoats
for the failures of their commanding general makes the ritual and
the soldiers’ deaths painful beyond measure. A similar paradox
infuses the sniper attack in “Full Metal Jacket.” We will examine
that set piece in more detail later in the chapter.
    In “2001: A Space Odyssey,” the single surviving astronaut’s trip
into deep outer space creates a sense that time and space are being
obliterated. Kubrick offered his interpretation of what it might be
like to approach the speed of light by shooting the passage as a light      235
show, with changes in speed indicated by the increasing diffusion
and refraction as the astronaut approaches his destination. Whether
hallucination or reality, the trip is quite unlike any other film jour-
ney in nature or length. It is otherworldly.
    Another set piece that is lengthy and almost unbearable to expe-
rience is the duel between Barry Lyndon and his stepson. Kubrick
takes us into the inner emotional state of the hatred of the son and
the ambivalence of the father. The set piece ends with a life shat-
tered, that of Barry Lyndon, who has lost his leg and his status as a
result of living a life of slipping morals and degradation. Barry
Lyndon’s fate is a caution to us all: To lift yourself above your station
you must be able to pay the price.
    We could include the attack on the ant hill in “Paths of Glory,”
the robbery in “The Killing,” the final battle in “Spartacus,” and
Torrance’s pursuit of his wife in “The Shining.” Using a mix of
camera motion and compositional acuity, each of these set pieces
powerfully contributes to the Kubrick mythology. We turn now to
the films and excerpts we will discuss in the remainder of the
chapter.

“2001: A Space Odyssey” (1968)
We begin with the dawn of man sequence in “2001: A Space
Odyssey.” The film is presented as a history of mankind from
the very beginning and well into the future. The focal point for the
dawn of man sequence is the evolution and resulting primacy of the
ape due to the development of weaponry. The focus of the balance
of the film is on man’s struggle for mastery over technology and the


                          Stanley Kubrick: The Darkness of Modern Life
