Vittoria de Sica and neorealism, Germany’s G.W. Pabst (“Pandora’s
      Box”) and expressionism. Others have decided their creative agenda
      should be reexamining the past in order to find a way toward a better
      future, such as Poland’s Andrej Wajda (“Ashes and Diamonds,” 1960)
      and Hungary’s István Szabó (“Mephisto,” 1982). Still others consider
      reconsideration of genres (based on their culture) as a way to intro-
      duce other cultures to their societies and introduce their societies to
      other cultures, such as Akira Kurosawa of Japan (“Seven Samurai,”
      1956) and Bille August of Denmark (“Pelle the Conqueror,” 1986).
      Finally, some have used the fable to press their countries to embrace
      change, such as Germany’s Werner Herzog (“The Enigma of Kaspar
64    Hauser,” 1984) and Michael Verhoeven (“The Nasty Girl,” 1989), as
      well as France’s Coline Serreau’s (“Chaos” (2002)).
          Whatever the approach, Europe and Asia have contributed
      mightily to the category of great directors. Before proceeding to
      discuss three directors in greater detail, I would like to mention a
      number of films and their filmmakers that represent great directing.
      If this book was solely about the subject of this chapter, the follow-
      ing directors would get the amount of space they deserve.
          In the category of great directors, I would include Volker
      Schlondorff (“The Tin Drum,” 1979) and Tom Tykwer (“The
      Princess and the Warrior,” 2001) from Germany; Mike van Diem
      (“Character,” 1998) from The Netherlands; Eric Zoncka (“The
      Dreamlife of Angels,” 1998) from France; and Thomas Vinterberg
      (“The Celebration,” 1997) from Denmark. “The Celebration” (or
      “Festen,” as it was called abroad), the first of the Dogme films, is prob-
      ably the single most influential European film of the 1990s. I would
      also include Elem Klimov (“Come and See,” 1987) and Nickolai
      Michalkhov (“Close to Eden,” or “Urga” in Europe, 1994) from the
      USSR; Bernardo Bertolucci (“Beseiged,” 1999) from Italy; Krystof
      Kieslowski (“Red,” 1995) from Poland; and Xiang Yimou (“Hero,”
      2002) from China. Each of these films transforms a narrative into a
      creative challenge to tradition or genre in unique and special ways.
      Having noted these great directors and their films, I will now take a
      more detailed look at three contemporary non-American directors.
          The choices here are abundant. To choose just three, I identified
      a notion that would tie together three filmmakers. Rather than
      seeking a national, stylistic, or creative (e.g., Dogme) commonality,
      I looked for filmmakers who exhibit a certain freedom in their


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
