character, wins the competition, but the gun is stolen by his rival,
          the antagonist, who in turn loses the gun to a gambler. Indians seek-
          ing to buy guns from the gambler instead kill him and steal the rifle.
          When the Indians’ chief is killed in battle, the gun passes to a ne’er-
          do-well. His pathological partner kills him for the gun, and he in
          turn is killed by the main character, who retrieves the rifle and uses
          it to kill the antagonist in a climactic shootout at the end of the film.
              “Winchester ’73” is anything but a romantic story. In fact, it is
          about constant betrayal. The power the rifle represents is elusive
          and temporary; those who come into possession of the powerful
          weapon end up losing it because the way in which they acquired it
50        was immoral or unethical. In short order, they are destroyed for
          their greed and their immorality. The narrative is made even more
          murky when we learn that the antagonist, whom the main charac-
          ter is pursuing with the intent to kill, is his own brother. He seeks to
          kill his brother because the brother killed their father. What at first
          seems to be a story about a gun has instead become a Cain-and-Abel
          story, a revenge story with a tragic core. The narrative is very
          complex, with a subtext of unleashed sibling rivalry working its way
          toward a horrible climax, where one brother kills the other brother,
          his only living blood relative.
              With regard to characterization, note how the characterizations of
          “Winchester ’73” differ from those in “The Lighthorsemen.” Again,
          the characterizations in “The Lighthorsemen” are romantic and sim-
          ple—men are either brave or cowardly. The Australians are straight-
          forward, and the British are eccentric or rigid. In “Winchester ’73,”
          only the main character, Lyn McAdam, is straightforward. He is a
          great marksman filled with a rage that drives him to avenge the death
          of his father.
              All of the other characters are interesting. The antagonist, Dutch
          Henry, is aggressive but he is also impulsive and immature. His two
          companions have to keep him on track. Wyatt Earp, who oversees
          the competition at the outset, is a lawman, but he is also a civic
          enthusiast and something of a caregiver. Lyn’s companion and
          friend, he is a father figure and something of a philosopher. He has
          to keep the main character from imploding due to his rage. The
          dance hall girl is honest, expressive, and funny, given the dangerous
          situations in which she constantly finds herself. Steve, her fiancé, is
          a coward trying to become a person who deserves respect, but he


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
