these shots are there to remind us of what is at stake (Fabian’s life),
as well as the power of the Gestapo over the lives of the Jews being
held.
   Another quality of Von Trotta’s visual choices has to do with
the editing. Because she is telling multiple stories, such as in
“Rosenstrasse,” transitions are necessary to suggest moving from
modern times to 1943. A piece of music or a bowl of soup can
provide such a transition. Equally important is Von Trotta’s use of
parallel action. “Rosenstrasse” has three main characters and occurs
over two time periods. Moving between time periods and from one
character to another, as well as maintaining the momentum of
the story and its tension, are serious editing challenges. Rather than    273
rely on pace to create an emotional arc, Von Trotta keeps the fate of
the two men (Fabian in 1943 and Luis in 2003) uncertain until the
end. The narrative tension consequently keeps the audience won-
dering and worrying if all will work out for Lena with Fabian and for
Hannah with Luis. Narrative clarity and dramatic emphasis were
the editing goals. Generous use of close-ups keeps the emotions
high, and the periodic use of camera movement further energizes
the narrative.
   One element that Von Trotta does reinforce visually is the link
between the historical life and the personal life. Adding to the
chauvinist maleness of the Nazis are the swastikas, Jewish stars, Nazi
salute, and personal embraces. The Nazis see Lena—the aristocrat,
the wife, the surrogate mother of Ruth—not as another human but
rather as another sexual opportunity. By embedding the historical
pathology of the Nazis in such a simple personal encounter, Von
Trotta allows the audience to experience the director’s idea dramat-
ically and in a highly emotionalized way. It is this kind of deep
directorial decision that raises the bar for Von Trotta’s audiences.
Just as her characters risk it all, Von Trotta herself is an ambitious
narrative risk taker. And when the risk pays off, as it does in each of
these four films, we witness the power of passion and commitment
in directing.




  Margarethe Von Trotta: Historical Life and Personal Life Intersect
