“Sex Is Comedy” (2002)
           “Sex Is Comedy” is a film about making a film. The film director is
           a woman (Anne Parillaud) and her focus seems to be on the sex
           scene where the two actors will consummate their relationship. The
           film begins on the beach. The two actors, young and clearly stars,
           seem to hate each other. The young woman (Roxane Mesquida) is
           agreeable and vapid, and the young man (Grégoire Colin) is dis-
           agreeable and utterly neurotic. It is cold and about to rain but the
           actors and extras have to pretend it is a summer day at the beach.
           Finally, though, the rain ends the day’s shooting. Jeanne, the direc-
           tor, is very cerebral and confides in her assistant director (Ashley
294        Wanninger) all of her thoughts and feelings. The scene shifts to a
           studio for the interior shots. Because the actor is so neurotic, Jeanne
           had a number of prosthetic penises made for the actor but nobody
           told the actress about them. The focus of the rest of the film is on
           the filming of the nude scene. The director spends a lot of time try-
           ing to develop a relationship with the actor. It is clear, however, that
           she despises him. She also keeps changing her mind about how she
           wants the 15-page sex scene shot. Conversations with the cine-
           matographer, set designer, and costumer continue but only in her
           scenes with her assistant does the director seem at ease; otherwise,
           she seems as high strung as the actor. All works out, and she films
           the scene (prosthetic and all). What is clear to the audience, at least,
           is that making a film is the equivalent of having sex—anxious
           moments followed by a joyous feeling of happiness and release. In
           “Sex Is Comedy” we will focus on the beach opening of the film.
           The scene provides Breillat with the perfect metaphor of artifice
           and reality, acting and feeling, beauty and boredom.

           “Anatomy of Hell” (2004)
           Finally we will look at the opening of “Anatomy of Hell.” “Anatomy
           of Hell” follows four nights of a sexual encounter between a woman
           (Amira Casar) and a homosexual (Rocco Siffredi). The end of the
           scene acknowledges the possibility of sexual intercourse between this
           man and woman, but their exchange of true feelings occurs in the
           opening. The woman is at a club. She is alone and seems unhappy in
           the midst of the sensual noise and dancing. She goes to the bathroom,
           where she slices her wrists. The homosexual enters and intervenes.
           He takes her to a doctor, who bandages her arms. She offers a kind of


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
