script, now being rewritten by Gillis. Here, the automobile repre-
sents status and the desire of Joe and Norma to be stars.
    In “The Apartment,” the motif is a bowler hat. Wearing such a
hat means C.C. Baxter has arrived; he has achieved the promotion
he sought. In “Double Indemnity,” the motifs are all sexual. Phyllis
Dietrichson’s ankle bracelet, the towel she wears when first meeting
Walter Neff, Barton Keyes’ cigars, and Mr. Dietrichson’s crutches
are all psychosexual elements of a highly sexualized narrative.
    A third visual element Wilder uses is to place his camera in such
a way that it establishes a power relationship. When Neff first sees
Phyllis, he is on the first floor and Phyllis is on the second-floor land-
ing. This position tells us immediately who holds the power in the            173
narrative. When Dobisch calls Baxter to make arrangements for the
use of his apartment in “The Apartment,” Dobisch is filmed in mid
shot but is foregrounded in the shot. When Baxter takes Dobisch’s
call, Baxter is more in the background of the shot. Again, who has
the power and who does not is made clear by the camera placement.
    The director’s idea for Wilder was to explore the behavior of a
character when that character’s very existence is at stake. This idea
and the films that emanated from it earned Wilder enormous praise
and industrial recognition. His films have also given rise to consid-
erable criticism—he was a cynic who trashed his country and its val-
ues when he was benefiting from being one of its citizens. These
responses suggest that Wilder did what an artist should do—prompt
examination of the status quo.
    I admire Wilder’s capacity to engage and enrage us with his char-
acters, and he did so with enormous wit. We should remember that
Wilder was displaced by the politics and racial policies of his coun-
try of origin. When he came to the United States, he could not
speak a word of English yet became one of the great wordsmiths of
American film. Because Wilder positions his characters in narra-
tives that raise the stakes to the point of his characters’ very exis-
tence, he goes to the very heart of great drama. How he set up the
text, how he organized performance to articulate the dilemma for
his characters, and how he orchestrated the camera in service of the
story are clear examples of narrative ambition. He took us further
than most directors choose to go, and for that reason his work
deserves to be revisited by new generations of directors. His work
incites the courage these directors will need.


                                           Billy Wilder: Existence at Stake
