and operational belief. It seems as if the actor wants the audience to
join in his or her belief. This belief is so strong that it is inspira-
tional, energetic . . . charismatic. Charismatic actors have extraor-
dinary attraction, or pull. Does your actor have it?
    Finally, sexuality. Every good actor knows that his or her film per-
formance is on one level a seduction; in order to draw in the audi-
ence, the actor has to be seductive. Does this particular actor have
that kind of magnetism? Is this actor attracting you, the director?
     This checklist allows the director to determine whether a par-
ticular actor conforms to the director’s vision of the character. Often
actors do not quite look the part but may bring something else to a
role.                                                                      107
    The second phase of the casting session—the reading by the
actor—also should be filtered through the five points discussed
above, although the reading itself has additional facets. The
“through line” becomes the measure. What interpretation of the
character is the actor aiming for? Does the interpretation conform
to that of the director, or is it different? How is it different? How
has the interpretation been built? Has the actor made a conscious
effort to construct the through line? Is there charm? Is there
energy? Is there belief? Does the actor want to please or displease?
These are all issues that arise during an interpretation. Whether
the character is stupid or brilliant, aware or unaware, the
director must be able to see how the actor is building the inter-
pretation and evoking feelings for the character such that the
director knows that a connection has been made and the perfor-
mance is developing.
    If the interpretation differs from that of the director, then the
question becomes one of how interesting the actor’s interpretation
is. If it has captured the director’s attention, then there is obviously
something there worth pursuing. The actor may be the right age
and have the right look but undermine everything in the reading.
For the director, the reading essentially reveals whether the actor
has an empathy for the character and whether the actor’s interpre-
tation has created something new. Finally, every actor wants a role,
so desire and energy are going to be givens in the audition. The
director’s job is to decide, using the five criteria, whether or not the
actor has been seductive enough in his or her reading and interpre-
tation of the character.


                                                                  The Actor
