of the film is the letter writing between Alfred and Clara. Both are
lonely in the big city, and each has begun a correspondence in
response to a personal ad in the newspaper. This secret correspon-
dence has led to an idealistic love affair between the two. The cor-
respondents have not arranged a meeting, but they know they have
found true love. Each is convinced that when they meet they will
become companions for life. In real life, at Matuschek and
Company, Alfred and Clara become bitter enemies, routinely call-
ing each other names and insulting each other. What will happen
when they finally meet and discover that they are each other’s true
love? Being a romantic comedy, everything deliciously works out by
the end of the film.                                                        177
    Before I go into detail about these four excerpts, it is necessary to
point out a number of unique characteristics about Lubitsch’s work.
The first impression of Lubitsch’s work is that words are more
important than images; consequently, it is easier to consider
Lubitsch a theatrical director for whom performance and setting
override the other filmic qualities of a work. Directors such as
George Cukor, Stanley Donen, and even Luis Bunuel have taken a
similar approach. This first impression, however, can be quite mis-
leading. And here we arrive at the “Lubitsch touch,” which refers to
the way Lubitsch uses visual detail. For example, in “Ninotchka,”
Ninotchka considers a hat in the hotel window a sign of capitalist
ostentation, but later it becomes an object of desire. When she buys
the hat, it is a declaration of her embrace of femininity and of her
pursuer, Leon. In “Trouble in Paradise,” Madame Colet’s necklace
becomes the target of theft, a signal of Madame Colet’s allure for
Gaston, and later it is presented as a gift to Lily to confirm Gaston’s
love for her. In “The Shop Around the Corner,” a letter is private,
confessional, and a vehicle for the idealized love of Clara for her
“true friend.” The cigarette box that plays “Ochi Chornya” is
equally multifaceted, moving from retail item to desired object to a
gift for someone you hate, and so on. In “To Be or Not To Be,” the
beard of a spy is as multifunctional as Hitler’s moustache. Lubitsch
worked in these visual details to reflect something about a character
and that character’s pursuit of his romantic ideal. What is surprising
and delightful for an audience is Lubitsch’s capacity to transform
something as simple as a hat or a letter or a beard into something far
more complex.


                              Ernst Lubitsch: The Life Force of Romance
