we are never privy to his inner life; consequently, the experience of
the film, although sensational, is never emotionally affecting. In
“Intimacy,” the audience is left out in the cold, the opposite of the
experience of Chereau’s “Queen Margot.”
    Although the term subtext seems to carry a pompous theatrical
resonance, film audiences who experience it are grateful for its
ambition. Jonathan Demme’s “Silence of the Lambs” (1994) is a
plot-driven police story: Find the serial killer Buffalo Bill. But, it is
also about Clarice’s coming of age as an adult and as a professional
person. Like the women who are victims of Buffalo Bill, Clarice
may be victimized by men or she can avoid victimization. This is
the subtext of “Silence of the Lambs.” Peter Jackson’s “The Lord of         27
the Rings” (2002–2004) has a number of plots, but let us focus here
on Frodo’s journey to rid the world of the ring that involves his per-
sonal struggle with the power of good and evil that the ring repre-
sents. He succeeds in his quest but is forever changed by the inner
struggle he has experienced while transporting the ring. Spiderman
has to contend with the evil doings of Dr. Octavius in Sam Rami’s
“Spiderman 2” (2004), but he also has to deal with the inner strug-
gle between his own personal goals and his sense of responsibility to
his community. In each case, the existence of a powerful subtext
raised a plot-driven genre film into a more powerful and meaning-
ful film experience.
    Finally, audiences want to be surprised. They want to be surprised
by twists and turns of the plot and they want to be surprised by the
behavior of characters. The notion that love of a sort (at least affec-
tionate respect) develops between the serial killer Hannibal Lechter
and his FBI protegé Clarice Starling is a delightful surprise for audi-
ences, as is the vulnerability of the action hero Indiana Jones when he
is in the company of his father in “Indiana Jones and the Lost
Crusade” (1987). Surprise, in the form of dialogue or a behavioral
twist or a plot shift, is valued by a film’s audience.


Directors and Competence

Here I would like to qualify what will follow in the rest of the chap-
ter. What do I mean by competence in directing? We can have two
extremes of directing, with competence lying in between those


                                                  The Competent Director
