the younger highly sexual; the older political, the younger more
imaginative. When the sisters become adults, their differences
become more intense, and they take opposing political positions—
older sister Juliane becomes a political journalist and younger sister
Marianne becomes a political terrorist. Yet, the most important per-
son for the other is her sister. It is the generational, gender, and char-
acter fault lines in the work that generate the historical–personal
director’s idea.
    Each of Von Trotta’s stories unfolds in the shape of a riddle with
the answer telling us who will survive. In “Sisters, or the Balance of
Happiness” (1979), again the story of two sisters, it is the older sister
who will survive the suicide of the younger. She survives by creating        263
a replacement relationship. A young secretary at work, who looks
like her sister, becomes the new sister. Although the strategy is
not permanent, it does help the older sister cope with her loss. In
“The Second Awakening of Crista Klages” (1977), a woman who
robs a bank to raise money for her childcare center loses her male
accomplices but when finally taken by the police is rescued by
the female bank employee whom she held captive during the bank
robbery. The employee denies Christa was the robber, and Christa
is given her second chance.
    Finally, Von Trotta emphasized character, the personal, over plot,
the historical. “Marianne and Juliane” is the story of a 1960s political
terrorist, Marianne, yet we do not see the bank robberies or the
bombings. Instead, the focus is on Marianne’s relationship with her
older sister, Juliane. There is a high point that expresses the love in
their relationship. Marianne is in prison, and Juliane is visiting her.
A male records their conversation. Two matrons watch to contain
the two women if necessary, and there is an armed guard present. We
are very aware of the level of intervention, the lack of privacy. At the
moment of saying goodbye Marianne asks her sister to swap sweaters,
a throwback to an adolescent desire to be close to the other. Without
hesitation the two strip off their sweaters and swap them and then
embrace. Their intimacy with the other at a moment when they have
four strangers in the room is personal and touching. All that matters
at that instant is the bond between them. Everything else is excluded.
It is a moment of intense love and revelation about the personal.
    In terms of excerpts, I am going to alter our approach slightly.
Rather than particular excerpts, I will examine the characterization of


  Margarethe Von Trotta: Historical Life and Personal Life Intersect
