One reason is financial. George Lucas (“Star Wars”), Steven
Spielberg (the “Indiana Jones” series, “Jurassic Park,” “Jaws”), and
Peter Jackson (“The Lord of the Rings” trilogy) have created finan-
cial empires within the Hollywood industry. Their scale is unprece-
dented. Another reason is critical recognition, that is to say, the
attention of the critics. Francis Ford Coppola (“The Godfather”
series, “Apocalypse Now”), Martin Scorsese (”Raging Bull,”
“Goodfellas,” “Kundun”), and Spike Lee (“Do the Right Thing,”
“25th Hour”) are not runaway commercial hit directors (indeed, the
works of Scorsese and Lee are rarely commercially impressive); nev-
ertheless, they are critically embraced and valued far beyond their
commercial viability (or lack thereof ).                                     7
    Yet another reason is the director’s willingness to experiment.
Steven Soderbergh experiments with clashing style and content
(“The Limey,” “Traffic”). David Mamet, a well-known playwright,
experiments with very filmic plot-oriented genres (“Heist,”
“Spartan,” “The Spanish Prisoner”); Mike Figgis experiments with
technology (“Time Code”); and Oliver Stone experiments with the
MTV influence (“Natural Born Killers”).
    A number of filmmakers try to replicate their style and success as
commercial and television video makers. The world of advertising
has launched the careers of Tony Scott (“Man on Fire”), Michael
Bay (“Bad Boys”), and McQ (“Charlie’s Angels”). Their transition
to filmmaking has worked and created yet another layer of directors
in the industry.
    Finally, some directors were something else before they became
directors, such as the actors Robert Redford (“Ordinary People”),
Clint Eastwood (“Mystic River”), Mel Gibson (“The Passion of
Christ”), Diane Keaton (“Unstrung Heroes”), and Angelica Huston
(“Bastard out of Carolina”). The theater directors Sam Mendes
(“American Beauty”), Nicolas Hytner (“The Crucible”), and David
Mamet (“The Winslow Boy”) follow in the footsteps of Elia Kazan,
and all do very good work.
    Another consideration with regard to today’s directors is that they
are far more international than their predecessors. Many successful
foreign directors (that is, directors who are successful in their own
countries) are now working in English productions as well as those
in their languages of origin. Istvan Szabo of Hungary (“Taking
Sides,” “Sunshine”), Luc Besson of France (“The Messenger,”


                                                              Introduction
