the treasure. When they stumble upon the Thuggee temple (which
           is the source of the diamonds), he sends Din to alert Sergeants
           McChesney and Ballantyne to come to his rescue. When all four
           men are captured by the Thuggees, the wounded Cutter enlists
           Din to warn the approaching army columns about the Thuggee trap
           that awaits them. Din dies blowing his bugle in warning. Cutter’s
           sense of conscience made him include the low-caste Gunga Din in
           his army. Notable is that the other two sergeants are indifferent to or
           dismissive of Din.
               In “Gunga Din,” Stevens focused on an adolescent presentation
           of the American character. In “The More the Merrier” he focuses
154        on an older but no less youthful version of that character. Benjamin
           Dingle represents the American character in all of its enterprising
           nature. As Dingle puts it often, “Full steam ahead!” Dingle’s desire
           is to get what he wants when he wants it. In “The More the
           Merrier,” the Dingle character lies readily and is constantly manip-
           ulating someone in order to get what he wants. He is an energetic
           transgressor whose age belies his methodology. Instead of being a
           sage or a wise old man, Dingle could be considered an older version
           of Sergeant Cutter from “Gunga Din.” He is all desire but he lacks
           Cutter’s conscience. In “The More the Merrier,” as in “Giant,” con-
           science is represented by a woman. In “The More the Merrier,” the
           woman is Connie Mulligan, but she is too rational and too wrapped
           up in doing the rational thing. Stevens pokes fun at the conscience
           for its overdeveloped view. It is as if in this comedy Stevens is saying
           that transgression can go a long way in bureaucratic wartime
           Washington, a place in need of Dingle’s particular style of organi-
           zational skills. Stevens embraced Dingle’s enterprising nature,
           regardless of its rough edges, and suggested that we need the
           Dingles of the world to help the other characters deal with matters
           of war and love.


           Directing the Actors

           In directing actors Stevens relied far less on casting his actors than
           he did on capitalizing on the strengths of his actors and seeking
           compensatory strategies to minimize their weaknesses (see com-
           ments on his work with Jean Arthur in Cronin’s George Stevens


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
