Introduction

In Roman Polanski’s work, the main characters are abandoned and
the question is whether they can continue to exist. At times the
answer is no, as in “The Tenant” (1976). At other times the answer
is yes, but the character has suffered a complete emotional collapse,
as in “Repulsion” (1965), or has borne the devil’s baby, as in
“Rosemary’s Baby” (1968). At yet other times, the character survives
with the wounds less obvious but no less deep, such as in “The
Pianist” (2002) and “Chinatown” (1974).
    So the question that persists in Polanski’s world is the existen-
tial paradox that if each of us is alone how can we survive or sus-       219
tain ourselves? Other filmmakers have concerned themselves
with these dark questions—Ingmar Bergman, Andrei Tarkovsky,
Krystof Kieslowski—but each of these filmmakers has suggested
occasionally in their work a remission from loneliness. The reli-
gious component in the work of each of these directors creates a
space for solace, for union with another. Not so Polanski. Polanski
is unique in his obsession with the nature of aloneness and
unique in his capacity to take us, his audience, into this space of
aloneness.
    In this chapter, we will explore Polanski’s work and his director’s
idea. Distilling that director’s idea is somewhat more difficult
because Polanski’s work has ranged so widely. If we were to look at
the two genres that have dominated his work, horror and film noir,
we might opt for victimization as a feature of his director’s idea.
Certainly “Repulsion” (1965), “Rosemary’s Baby” (1968), and “The
Tenant” qualify as horror, while “Chinatown” (1974), “Cul de Sac”
(1966), and “Bitter Moon” (1992) qualify as film noir. If we add the
war film “The Pianist” (2002), the melodrama “Tess” (1981), and the
thrillers “Knife in the Water” (1962) and “Death and the Maiden”
(1994), we begin to flesh out a world view that, on one level, depicts
life as disappointing and relationships as betraying, in addition to
the historical forces that conspire against the individual. Is this a
paranoid view of life, or is it simply a modern as opposed to a
romantic acceptance of life as a primal struggle where physical sur-
vival is possible but spiritual survival more unlikely? If we accept
this view of relationships and community and national struggles, we
begin to sense that the outcome for his characters will be that they

                            Roman Polanski: The Aloneness of Existence
