the soldiers and their plight (survival) through a romantic prism;
consequently, the camera generally photographs the action from a
low angle looking upward. This creates a heroic image of the four
principal characters. He also uses the alternative of extreme long
shots of the Lighthorsemen marching across the desert. Such
images, shot at daybreak or dusk, provide a powerful impression of
unity, strength, even fortitude with regard to the group as a whole.
When photographing the Lighthorsemen in battle, Wincer uses var-
ious lenses, including telephoto (to compress the visual context)
and extreme close-ups of the enemy or of a Lighthorseman respond-
ing to the enemy. This alternating between extreme long shots
with extreme close-ups supports the romantic sense of the                37
Lighthorsemen. As a battle proceeds, the increased pace or tempo
of the editing adds a certain dynamism to the scene. Wincer never
varies, however, from his romantic view of the characters or their
actions.
    Singularity of visualization is a choice that consistently implies
the intent of the director. Two extreme examples from other war
films will help contextualize the director’s intent. At one extreme is
the bombing of Pearl Harbor in Michael Bay’s film “Pearl Harbor”
(2000). Bay’s purpose in the film, like Wincer’s, is to romanticize
the heroism of the American airman in the film. The attack on
Pearl Harbor is not so much horrific in its presentation as it is
romantic. At one point, there is a shot of a bomb falling toward the
ships that will be destroyed in the harbor. The shot, from the point
of view of the bomb, illustrates the precision, even the beauty of
the bombing. No tragedy here, just bombs doing their work. At
the other extreme is the shot of Slim Pickens riding a nuclear
bomb down toward its target in the USSR in Stanley Kubrick’s
“Dr. Strangelove” (1991). Pickens rides the bomb as if he is a cowboy
riding a bronco. Here, too, we follow the bomb toward its intended
target, but the image is intended to editorialize an American
airman’s view of attacking the enemy. It is cavalier, even insane in
its dissociation from the intent of the bomb: to kill hundreds of
thousands of Russians. The image reverberates with director
Kubrick’s voice. Nuclear war is insane, an act of madness born of a
cowboy mentality. Here, the image is complex and troubling.
    Returning to the bombing in “The Lighthorsemen,” bombs fall
and men die, particularly Lighthorsemen, but their deaths are


                                                The Competent Director
