A second quality of Ford’s casting was that he always focused on
           particular types of men—rugged, outdoor types who either had a
           taste for drink or at least looked as if they did. It is notable that Ford
           rarely focused on women in his films (although his last film was
           “Seven Women”). Maureen O’Hara is one of the only actresses to
           make a recurring appearance in his films. She was also the only
           actress to have multidimensional characters in his films. Ford’s
           focus on men was inescapable.
               Over time Ford developed in effect a stock company that he used
           repeatedly in his films. Victor McLaughlin, John Carradine,
           George O’Brian, Andy Devine, Ben Johnson, and Harry Carey, Jr.,
142        made multiple appearances in Ford’s films. Although each was used
           in key secondary roles, as often as not they were used to introduce
           humor into the narrative; for example, in Ford’s cavalry trilogy,
           McLaughlin played the role of a functional alcoholic whose
           purpose was entirely to add an element of humor.
               In addition to his casting, a second notable characteristic of
           Ford’s work with actors is that he was primarily interested in pre-
           senting them as feeling or passionate characters—whether working
           with an artist (Alan Mowbray, as the actor in “My Darling
           Clementine”) or an intellectual (James Stewart in “The Man Who
           Shot Liberty Valance”). As a result, Ford’s characters did not have
           conventional character arcs. They are not transformed characters so
           much as they are revealed characters. Although John Brickley
           (Robert Montgomery) is a commander, a leader who always obeys
           the chain of command without dissent, Ford made a point of estab-
           lishing Brickley as a man who also feels deeply. He is the character
           who gives voice to feelings for the others—for the passionate Rusty
           who wants to get on with the war, for the deeply feeling nurse Sandy
           who is clearly in love with the men she tends to, for the crew as
           fellow humans whose loss is the cost of war. As these moments
           occur in the film, Brickley is revealed to be a fine commander who
           cares but suffers the losses silently to hold onto his dignity.
               The brevity of the character arc makes Ford’s characters less real-
           istic compared to Elia Kazan’s characters, who are psychologically
           realistic. The characters seem to transcend realism to become
           icons—the decent lawman Wyatt Earp in “My Darling Clementine”
           and the passionate Ethan Edwards in “The Searchers,” who was just
           the kind of man to tame Texas for future generations.


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
