These scenes highlight the poetry of Ford’s work and the passion
and nobility of his heroes.

“The Grapes of Wrath” (1940)
“The Grapes of Wrath” tells the story of the Joad family, who had to
abandon their share-cropped land in Oklahoma to migrate to
California to seek a new life. Muley’s story focuses on the displace-
ment of the Joads’ neighbor. Tom Joad (Henry Fonda) has returned
from prison only to find his parents gone, preparing to leave for
California. His neighbor Muley tells him of their eviction by the
bank in Tulsa. Foreclosures and displacement have accompanied
the drought in the region, a drought that coincides with the Great          137
Depression and its nationwide unemployment. In this scene, the
bulldozers level Muley’s home, which has been in his family for sev-
eral generations.

“My Darling Clementine” (1946)
“My Darling Clementine” tells the story of Wyatt Earp (Henry
Fonda). When he and his brothers drive a herd of cattle to California,
the cattle are stolen and his brother James is killed outside of the town
of Tombstone. Earp becomes the town marshal to apprehend the
killers of his brother. He is aided by his two brothers, Morgan and
Virgil, and by Doc Holliday. He and his brothers meet the
rustler/killers at the OK Corral and justice is done. The clip focuses
on Wyatt’s relationship (or desired relationship) with Clementine
(Cathy Downs), Doc Holliday’s lady from the East. In this scene, the
two attend a Sunday church meeting. When they dance it is a sign to
tell all that Clementine may now be the marshal’s lady.

“They Were Expendable” (1945)
“They Were Expendable” begins just before the Japanese attack on
Pearl Harbor and ends just before the American loss of the Philippines
to the Japanese. The focus of the film is on two PT boat commanders,
John Brinkley (Robert Montgomery) and Rusty Ryan (John Wayne).
They are advocates of the small mobile boats but the Navy and the
Army are not. For the military, PT boats and their men are marginal,
expendable. The film focuses on these two commanders and their
crews, who want to feel that they are contributing to the war effort.
The scene I will discuss takes place in the hospital. Rusty has sustained


                                            John Ford: Poetry and Heroism
