“Leon the Professional”), and Tom Tykwer of Germany (“Heaven”)
     are among the best known of these filmmakers.
         American directors are also taking a more flexible approach to
     their careers. Spike Lee makes documentaries and commercials
     between his feature films. Martin Scorsese also makes documen-
     taries between his features. Steven Soderbergh occasionally jumps
     into digital video and small-scale features in between his more
     commercial projects. Barry Levinson takes on edgy television proj-
     ects in addition to his more conservative (read commercial) feature
     films. Oliver Stone has moved from directing a low-budget HBO
     documentary about Castro to directing a $200 million feature about
8    Alexander the Great. In Europe, Lars von Trier continually experi-
     ments with the style of his films. Roger Michell jumps from film to
     television to theater with great frequency.
         One of the most interesting career paths exhibiting this flexibility is
     that of Ang Lee. Lee has moved from ethnic family comedies (“Eat
     Drink Man Woman”) to Jane Austen family comedy (“Sense and
     Sensibility”) to Chinese-language action adventure (“Crouching
     Tiger, Hidden Dragon”) to American action adventure (“The
     Incredible Hulk”). And I have not even mentioned his Western or
     nonlinear films! This degree of diversity keeps the director challenged
     and in risk-taking rather than risk-aversion mode.
         What I am suggesting is that today the director is a superstar, but
     the means of becoming such a superstar as well as sustaining one’s
     superstardom have grown far more complex.


     The Structure of the Book

     This book is divided into two parts. The first focuses on the question
     “What is directing?” and discusses how a director arrives at the direc-
     tor’s idea. The first half of Part I defines the director’s idea and
     differentiates competent or technical directing, good directing, and
     great directing. I realize that competent, good, and great are loaded,
     subjective words. They are hierarchical, and my use of such termi-
     nology and my taste may not match those of the reader; neverthe-
     less, I am going to use these terms to capture the sense that there is
     a distinct path to improved directing and that the path requires a
     premise, a director’s idea, to guide the choices the director makes.


The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
