subverted into a more practical approach to life. Also key to the per-
       formances is developing this capacity for subversion without making
       the change farcical. In fact, Moodysson handles the change believ-
       ably. The camera is direct and close to the characters in order to
       capture the changes. Because the characters’ arcs are similar, there
       is no confusion in the editing. The shot selection is similar in “Lilja
       4-Ever,” although the character arc is more intense, as in the end
       Volodya and Lilja choose to end their lives. The subversion here is
       that in nature Lilja and Volodya are decent, moral friends. It is the
       people around them who undermine the life force and move these
       characters toward their deaths.
328        We end this chapter by looking at the two remaining directors,
       Sergei Eisenstein and John Ford. Both preferred to use the camera
       and text interpretation to create the distinct styles central to their
       work. Their distinctive styles transformed their films from a tale well
       told to an altogether different level of experience. Many filmmakers
       have opted for including political or historical material in their films
       but none has matched Eisenstein in the formal power of his
       imagery. Composition and the juxtaposition of light within a frame
       and between consecutive shots go to the heart of depicting the con-
       flict and transformation typically found in Eisenstein’s work. The
       vigor of Eisenstein’s style elevates “Ivan the Terrible” from a portrait
       of an important monarch to an operatic tragedy of a man aban-
       doned and betrayed by all those around him. The transformation of
       a man into someone who has earned the surname “Terrible” is
       tragic because of Eisenstein’s operatic interpretation. Francis Ford
       Coppola used the same operatic interpretation to transform “The
       Godfather” into an iconic American tragedy.
           As much can be said for John Ford. His politics may seem old
       fashioned and his narrative rambling, but his style turns nostalgia,
       romance, loss, love, and revenge into poetry. Few filmmakers have
       been able to summon the power of style in such a manner as Ford
       did in “The Grapes of Wrath” and “The Searchers.” The poetry he
       created suggested a larger-than-life quality or deeper soul within his
       characters. Ford exemplified the capacity for greatness in us all.
       Westerns and poetry—these are the legacies of John Ford.
           The path to great direction is a varied one. By choosing a partic-
       ular mix of tools, a director can formulate a director’s idea that will
       realize his vision.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
