presentation of Alexander Nevsky in the foreground fishing and
           later gazing landward to assess the altercation with the Mongol sol-
           diers. His response about not disturbing the fish is less impressive
           than his posture and the visual elements behind him—the extended
           fishing net and the fishermen deep in the background of the frame.
           The composition creates a heroic image of Nevsky. He literally tow-
           ers over his people. Because he shares the same frame with them,
           the image supports the idea that Nevsky is connected to these peo-
           ple. This heroic presentation of Nevsky continues as he rides into
           Novgorod to invite the residents to join him in battle with the
           German invaders. This compositional structure is maintained when
130        Nevsky argues battle strategy with his commanders, goes into battle
           on the frozen lake, and later declares victory over the Germans. The
           camera looks up at its hero, a leader of the people.
               If Alexander Nevsky is the powerful leader, Ivan the Terrible is
           transformed into the mythical leader. Early in “Ivan the Terrible,
           Part I,” Ivan is in his palace seated at a desk on which sits a globe. The
           lighting casts a shadow, and behind Ivan his shadow engulfs an entire
           wall. Eisenstein created a myth, and man and myth share the same
           image. Eisenstein amplified this idea at the end of “Ivan the Terrible,
           Part I,” when Ivan has retreated to the village of Alexandrov. He will
           not return to Moscow until the people of Moscow invite him to
           return to lead them. In the foreground of one image, Ivan looks from
           the tower that faces in the direction of Moscow. In the background is
           an endless, winding, weaving line of people (all the way back to
           Moscow?). There, in the same shot, are the leader and those he will
           lead. It is a remarkable image. Few shots in film history are as power-
           ful, but the gates of Babylon in D.W. Griffith’s “Intolerance” (1917)
           and the attack on the train in David Lean’s “Lawrence of Arabia”
           (1962) are two that come to mind. In each case, the director is mixing
           man and myth. Eisenstein’s power as a visualist and as a transforma-
           tive director is best illustrated by this image.


           Directing for the Edit

           For our discussion of Eisenstein’s editing, we will focus on the Odessa
           Steppes sequence in “Potemkin,” on the Pskov massacre sequence in
           “Alexander Nevsky,” and on the coronation sequence in “Ivan the


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
