another is an absolute cynic. The point here is that, for Fuqua, char-
acter is not as important as plot.
    Although there are numerous plot twists in King Arthur, the story
lacks a great deal of surprise. Fuqua’s film is arresting visually,
which we will turn to shortly, but the machinations of plot do not
shock or thrill us, which brings us to the director’s point of view, or
lack of a point of view.
    Few characters in history have conjured up more enthusiasm
than King Arthur. Was he an idealist? Was he a man ahead of his
time? Was Arthur a fool? Antoine Fuqua and Clive Owen have tried
to present Arthur as idealistic and noble, yet what he seems to be
above all else is a super leader. Fuqua’s Arthur is militaristic, a hero.   31
Fuqua’s Arthur is the idealized hero rather than the idealist as hero.
In this sense, he is a romanticized cartoon character, made all the
more so for the cruelty of his antagonist. Fuqua’s point of view as the
director is to see the Arthur legend as an opportunity for visual
excitement, an area that displays his own particular skill as a direc-
tor. So, we should examine where Fuqua chose to place his camera.
Those positions best serve to bring to life his singular view of the
text: It is a struggle of good guys versus bad guys, and the heroes will
overcome the villains, just as beauty always overcomes ugliness, at
least in the plot-driven adventure genre.
    With regard to the landscape, Hadrian’s Wall defined the north-
ernmost boundary of lands held by Rome. That land at various
times in the film is heavily forested or has ice-covered mountains
and lakes. The land is evocative as opposed to being geographically
correct. That land is visually presented as heavily shadowed and
menacing. The land is not so much a real place as an active envi-
ronment that takes sides. Realism is far away; atmosphere is every-
thing. Fuqua preferred the use of very low or very high angles and
extreme long shots to present the land.
    In terms of how he presents people, they too appear in extreme
long shot, a dot on the horizon, or in extreme close-up. Fuqua used
the land and the people (Arthur, Merlin, the knights, the Romans,
and the Saxons) to evoke a particular atmosphere and feeling. It is
as if each person is an icon, a superhero, or a supervillain. The
intense close-ups establish the person. The extreme long-shots
establish the opposition, which is so great that surviving makes each
character a superhero. The rapid pace at which characters and their


                                                  The Competent Director
