Bedouins. They escort the major, who may be a spy, to their head-
          quarters. Quickly we learn that he is the intelligence officer for
          General Allenby, who will shortly take command of the allied army
          in the region. The spy quickly becomes the indispensable hero of
          the upcoming campaign against Beersheba. But, to do so, the major
          enlists the nurse mentioned earlier to write the forged love letter of
          a wife to her officer husband, a letter that is in short order planted
          to mislead the Turks about the location of the upcoming offensive.
          This narrative turn of events is as rapid and simplified as all the
          other narrative events in the film.
              Wincer’s approach is to tell the narrative in a simplified and
34        rapid manner, an approach that will not undermine the overall
          intent—to present the romantic heroism of the Australian
          Lighthorsemen regiment. None of the narrative events should dis-
          tract us from this intent. As we look at Wincer’s approach to char-
          acterization, a similar pattern emerges. Danny is shy and young.
          Having lost a brother in the war, he wants to prove he is as worthy
          and committed to family and country as was his brother. His prob-
          lem is that, although he is a good rider and shot, he simply cannot
          kill another human being. This is his dilemma. No such dilemma
          for his three mates. They are rugged and manly and they miss their
          families, but they have no problem killing. We know little else
          about them.
              Officers tend to fall into two categories: The English officers are
          rigid or eccentric, and the Australian officers are able and risk-
          taking, feeling and pragmatic, which the English and German officers
          are not. Only the Turkish officers among the enemy are portrayed
          as able and honorable. The Germans are rigid and not able or
          smart. The only woman in the film, the nurse, is compassionate and
          serious and beautiful—what we would all like our nurses to be.
          Wincer’s approach to characterization, then, serves the simplified
          narrative approach.
              To take this discussion to the next level, we need to look at
          whether the director keeps the narrative simple or departs from this
          strategy. Is the simplified narrative a start point or is it the end point?
          I would have to say that competent directors tend to view the narra-
          tive as the start and end points. The narrative in “The
          Lighthorsemen” is a good example. The literal treatment of the story
          as a romantic revisitation of a historical event suggests and makes for


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
