Introduction

Steven Spielberg’s films tend to convey a certain “heaviness” with
regard to adult life but joy and belief with regard to the children. He
is at his most effective in his films that focus on childhood, such as
“E.T.” (1982) and “Empire of the Sun” (1987), and in films where the
adults act like enthusiastic adolescents, such as “Raiders of the Lost
Ark” (1981) and “Jurassic Park” (1994). His portrayals of adult life, on
the other hand, are marked by destructive human behavior, such as
“Schindler’s List” (1993) and “Amistad” (1997), in which Spielberg
constructed stories about such human tragedies as the Holocaust and
a slave revolt in such a way as to create a hero. Oskar Schindler and        247
Roger Baldwin represent the triumph of humanism over barbarism.
These optimistic interpretations of two of the darkest moments in
human history contrast sharply with the work of Stanley Kubrick, for
example. Perhaps it is fair to say that Spielberg’s director’s idea
requires that he find a romantic hero to align the dark material of
“Schindler’s List” and “Amistad” more closely with the core
approach that characterizes his children’s films.
    That core approach has certain qualities that elevate his director’s
idea, and it is best that we take a moment to clarify those qualities to
better understand how Spielberg articulates his director’s idea. First
and foremost, Spielberg uses plot to challenge his main character,
and the plot is vigorous. An alien lands on Earth and wants to return
home in “E.T.” In “Saving Private Ryan,” the challenge of rescuing
the private behind enemy lines shortly after the D-Day landing is
formidable, given the German hold on the French territory. A killer
shark haunts the beaches of an island resort in “Jaws” (1975). The war
against the Jews is the plot in “Schindler’s List.” A slave revolt and its
aftermath comprise the plot of “Amistad.”
    Spielberg also deploys a substantial antagonist who is powerful
enough to elevate the actions of the main character to a heroic
level. Consider Amon Goeth (Ralph Fiennes) in “Schindler’s List,”
those killer raptors in “Jurassic Park,” and the overambitious French
archeologist in “Raiders of the Lost Ark.”
    Spielberg also endeavors to create an otherwise ordinary hero
who is much easier for the audience to identify with. Think of Elliott
(Henry Thomas) in “E.T.,” John Miller (Tom Hanks) in “Saving
Private Ryan,” Police Chief Martin Brody (Roy Scheider) in “Jaws,”

                                     Steven Spielberg: Childhood Forever
