Antoine’s Love and Other Troubles. In these cutaways, we see
Antoine and Colette and the development of their relationship in a
very short time. By using clips from his past films, Truffaut was able
to intertwine the story of Antoine and Colette, two characters, with
the work of François Truffaut, film director. Truffaut is being play-
ful, just as he was playful with his use of the moving camera in
“Stolen Kisses” and “The 400 Blows.”
    Whether we think of Truffaut the director celebrating filmmak-
ing or celebrating the young romantic yearnings of Colette and
Antoine or the adult yearnings of Antoine and Colette for romance
in their contemporary life, the net effect of a visual narrative strat-
egy such as using parallel action and cutaways becomes so much            215
greater. Truffaut surprised us with his playful attitude toward these
techniques and thrilled us with his nostalgic narrative. This is the
real purpose of his visual choices—surprise and pleasure.
    Clearly Truffaut could use pace when he chose to. In numerous
sequences in “Day for Night” he used a quick montage of close-ups
to characterize the details of filmmaking—lights, camera, and
action. He also used long takes of the film to open and close the
film. These shots were accomplished with the use of a dolly and
crane, again illustrating the nature of the techniques of filmmaking.
    But Truffaut never forgot the apparent narrative purpose of a
scene and its real purpose. The excerpt that I described earlier in
the chapter focused on a stunt, the death scene of Pamela. The
stunt itself, the center of the scene, is the ostensible narrative pur-
pose of the scene; however, the real purpose of the scene is to reveal
that Liliane is leaving Alphonse for the stuntman. The scene opens
with medium shots of Alphonse in bed and Liliane saying goodbye.
He chastises her for wearing someone else’s watch. He appears jeal-
ous. She tries to be reassuring. He grabs her genital area, an act of
possession. The childish Alphonse is content (but he shouldn’t be).
All this is detailed in a series of mid shots. The Joelle/Bernard
encounter follows, and then the stunt itself. The scene ends with
Liliane leaving with the stuntman. Julie drives up to thank the
stuntman for making her character’s death look good. When Liliane
tells her she is leaving with the stuntman, Julie becomes upset and
speaks on behalf of Alphonse. Liliane says she cannot be lover,
mother, sister, and nurse to Alphonse. It is too much. Besides, she is
in love. As in the opening scene, a series of mid shots detail the


                                 François Truffaut: Celebrate the Child
