A third strategy Woody Allen uses to break down the wall between
film characters and audiences is probably the most famous scene in
“Annie Hall.” Allen is in line to see Ophul’s documentary, “The
Sorrow and the Pity.” Behind him two academics chatter on, the
man trying to impress the woman with a flood of McLuhanesque
observations and interpretations. Allen’s character grows increasingly
frustrated and eventually walks away, only to reappear with the real
Marshall McLuhan, who proceeds to tell off the academic, after
which he leaves the scene. This intervention in the narrative serves
to bring the real world into the film.
    The performer/character strategy is used to heighten the roman-
ticism in “Manhattan” and to give the characters in “Hannah and              61
Her Sisters” the opportunity to confess, in a therapeutic fashion,
their desire and their guilt. In both cases, the strategy amplifies the
narrative and transforms it from a love story to a commentary on a
particular time and place—New York, today. In a sense the direc-
tor’s idea has made Allen not only an impassioned storyteller
(Fellini) but also a modern philosopher on our lives and times
(Bergman).
    To understand the director’s idea that operates in the work of
Martin Scorsese, we need to review the films of Roberto Rossellini,
Robert Bresson, and Yasujiro Ozu. In their films, characters who
have an inner drive to be valuable and to be validated find
the world a disappointing place. In “Open City” (Rossellini, 1945),
the disappointment is in the realpolitique of fascism operating to
corrupt a society and its individuals. In “Mouchette” (Bresson,
1970), it is found in the indifference and cruelty of communities and
families to a simple, underprivileged young girl. In “Tokyo Story”
(Ozu, 1953), it can be seen in the selfishness of one generation
(children) toward another generation (parents). In each story, a
character operates or lives by a moral code that simply does not
help them. It is as if a character seeks or lives within a state of grace
(spirituality) that the family or community or society does not share.
The consequence is disappointing but on another level is tragic.
    This tragedy, the gap between the inner life of a character and
the lives of the character’s surrounding family, community, or soci-
ety, is the thread that runs through the work of Martin Scorsese. His
characters seek a state of grace but what they find is a material
world, a political world that cannot nurture them. Indeed, it is a


                                                        The Great Director
