becomes King, takes Guinevere as his Queen, and claims Britain as
          the last bastion of freedom, at which point the film ends.
              The text as presented sidesteps the Pagan/Christian thread of
          the story which became so compelling an element in the narrative
          in Boorman’s “Excalibur.” Instead, the main thread is the plot:
          The Romans are leaving. The Saxons are coming. The Woats will
          fight for their land. What will Arthur do? What will his knights,
          who are not Britons, do? Although Arthur speaks about equality
          and freedom, he is presented for the most part as a gifted warrior,
          and his knights, although physically different from one another,
          are also attractive and gifted warriors. Some are more physically
30        imposing than others but essentially they are the good guys, no
          mistake about it.
              Guinevere, although she will be the love interest, is more con-
          science than lover, and she too is a gifted warrior. If I had to char-
          acterize this group of protagonists I would call them noble in their
          idealism and in their comradeship, but these characterizations are
          stereotypical rather than compelling, suitable to a plot-driven action
          adventure film. Fuqua used the same approach to characterize the
          military extraction team in “Tears of the Sun.”
              Just as the good are very good, the bad characters are very bad,
          suitable for the antagonists in an action adventure film. Stellan
          Skarsgård plays the leader of the Saxons, and he takes the meaning
          of cruelty to another level. I must admit that it’s great fun to watch
          a good actor work with a stereotype.
              The director’s priority in “King Arthur” is the plot. The battle
          scenes begin early with the introduction of Arthur and his knights
          while fighting Woats who have attacked a Roman convoy. Later, the
          two set pieces involve combat with the Saxons, with the first being
          a battle on an iced-over lake. That battle pits eight bowmen against
          a thousand Saxons. A few days later the odds are no better.
          Thousands of Saxons face Arthur, the knights, and the Woats at
          Badon Hill inside Hadrian’s Wall. Each battle proves that tactics
          and bravery and ferocious determination win the day.
              Between battles is the time for characterization, but character is
          presented in shorthand. One knight has a falcon; the most daunting
          knight, physically, has a relationship with the Woat boy freed at the
          Roman villa. The second most physically daunting knight has
          eleven bastard children. Another is masterful with the bow, and yet


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
