Turning to the plot, even its twists and turns are continually
          telegraphed in the story. The plot twist that will save the day and win
          the battle at Beersheba is that the Lighthorsemen are mounted
          infantry. They are expected to ride to battle, dismount, and fight the
          enemy. That is what we are told from the beginning of the film, and
          we do see them dismount to fight. Certainly the Turks expect them
          to dismount as they charge the city, and when they do the Turkish
          artillery will decimate their ranks. But, we know that in this battle
          the Lighthorsemen have been ordered to ride into battle. They do,
          and they win the day and the town. Plot is treated in just this way
          throughout the film. There are twists and turns, but not the kind of
36        narrative twist found in two of the great narratives of 2003: Pedro
          Almodovar’s “Talk to Her” and Denys Arcand’s “The Barbarian
          Invasions.” In those films, surprises and revelations of deeper narra-
          tive intentions have delighted audiences all over the world and
          raised to almost mythic levels the reputations of these two
          writer–directors.
              Finally, we turn to the point of view of the director. Sometimes
          referred to as voice, point of view can be best considered as a coun-
          terpoint to the narrative. That voice can be articulated around a
          character or the plot, and it can be expressed in irony or in the direc-
          tion of performance. Whatever strategy the director chooses, point
          of view will and should surprise the audience. For example, in
          Stanley Kubrick’s “Full Metal Jacket” (1987), the first half of the
          film presents the sergeant in basic training as the enemy. In the sec-
          ond half of the film, set in Vietnam, the critical sequence is a sniper
          attack. At the end of the sequence, we discover that the sniper is a
          teenage girl. Dying, she begs for death as the members of the patrol
          debate whether they should kill her or let her bleed to death. In the
          end, the most pacifist member of the unit, Joker, kills her. Ironically,
          this scene is the most humane in the film. Kubrick is displaying a
          point of view at odds with the narrative. Life is precious. Even death
          can be precious if it is intended to end suffering. Here, in the midst
          of a killing field, Kubrick finds humanity. His subversive voice is a
          distinct and distinctive point of view.
              No such irony or subversion is at play in “The Lighthorsemen.”
          Wincer’s point of view is romantic, just as the characters and events
          are romantic. Such a direct approach supporting the narrative typi-
          fies the work of the competent director. Wincer has chosen to view


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
