hidden, masked. Spielberg does this to provide a transparency to
           their professional effectiveness. The personal is private, masked, so
           it will not get in the way of the characters’ conduct of their work. As
           in the case of Stevens, Spielberg relies on the close-up and camera
           movement to articulate the feelings, professional and personal, of
           his main characters.
               Both Stevens and Spielberg have defined humanity in terms of
           the other—a couple, a platoon, a community. Roman Polanski and
           Stanley Kubrick, on the other hand, have focused on the individual,
           the solitary self being pummeled and punished by another. Their
           focus is on the existence of the self and its quality, based on chal-
326        lenges by the actions of others. Both Polanski and Kubrick have used
           a mix of performance and camera to evoke this punishing dynamic.
           Whether the two directors were or are pessimists or realists is a matter
           of interpretation. What we experience in their work, however, is a
           transformation of the narrative into its most basis struggle, the self
           struggling to survive under the most ferocious attack from social,
           political, even spiritual antagonists.
               Polanski uses the camera to highlight or focus upon the
           individual—Tess, in Hardy’s adaptation of “Tess,” and Rosemary, in
           “Rosemary’s Baby.” These women’s perspectives on the world are
           represented by a subjective camera that is so intimate that it crowds
           them, revealing the anxiety they feel about their state of aloneness.
           Their performances are attenuated to their communities. They want
           connectivity but all they are offered is the traditional female posi-
           tion of powerlessness, of being used for other agendas and then
           abandoned. In this sense, the performances focus on their vulnera-
           bility. Casting and the shape of the performances emphasize their
           openness and their vulnerability. The consequence is that they are
           disposable, having served the agendas of powerful men in society.
           Their existence is in the service of others.
               In the case of Kubrick, the camera roams, focusing on the
           narcissism of a New York doctor and his wife or on the callowness
           of a young Irish nobleman. In “Eyes Wide Shut” and “Barry
           Lyndon,” the characters are held up for examination. The camera is
           the witness to their feelings. In terms of performance, Kubrick’s
           characters are enacting a habitual state. They are dissatisfied and
           trapped in that state. Ryan O’Neal, Tom Cruise, and Nicole
           Kidman seem self-conscious about their unheroic characters. Their


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
