Danny Rose” (1984). In “Crimes and Misdemeanors,” the darkness of
       human behavior, so central a theme for Bergman, manifests itself in
       the ophthalmologist who gets away with commissioning the murder of
       his mistress. Faith, or the loss of it, is also addressed in the work of both
       filmmakers. A circus (or clown) theme is prevalent in the attitude and
       work of Fellini, just as it is in Allen’s “Broadway Danny Rose.” Closely
       related to the circus idea is the magic of the movie media, the theme
       of Allen’s “The Purple Rose of Cairo,” a film that echoes Fellini’s
       “The White Sheik.”
           But it is in Allen’s films about love and relationships that we see
       his director’s idea most powerfully at play. Looking at “Annie Hall”
60     (1977), “Manhattan” (1980), and “Hannah and Her Sisters” (1986),
       we can see that each focuses on different variations of relationships.
       First, in “Annie Hall,” we see the relationship between a Jew and a
       Shiksah, a gentile very different from himself. In “Manhattan,” the
       focus is on the relationship between an adult and a teenager, where
       age, not cultural background, is the barrier. Finally, in “Hannah
       and Her Sisters,” the difficult relationship is between a married man
       and his sister-in-law. Allen plays a central role in the first two films
       and a more subsidiary role in the third. Each film explores the need
       for love (a relationship) in the ultra-urban, upper middle class
       society of modern New York. In each case the love is crucial and
       intense, but the relationships are doomed to failure, so the focus is
       on the bittersweet outcomes of the relationships. Two of Allen’s later
       films, “Husbands and Wives” and “Deconstructing Harry,” focus on
       lonely characters, survivors of doomed love relationships.
           To examine more closely how the director’s idea works, we turn
       first to “Annie Hall” (1977), in which Allen assumes the role of
       narrator to comment on the narrative action, on being a Jew in a
       gentile society, on his relationship with his mother, or on other
       dimensions of feeling like an outsider. Allen feels free to intersperse
       such commentary freely throughout the narrative. Another strategy
       is to have the characters themselves address the audience directly, as
       he does when he introduces his classmates from junior high school
       to the audience. Visually, each is five years old, but they tell us what
       they are doing or have become as adults. The contrast between the
       angelic visuals and misanthropic futures—“I’m on methadone,”
       “I’m a prostitute,” etc.—is startling and makes the point that life
       disappoints and is not what it seems to be in one’s childhood.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
