Again, the sequence is clear and progresses naturally. The first
       shot is a close-up of an alarm clock—it is 7:00 a.m. Retrieving
       the milk from outside the door and later the newspaper, making the
       coffee, showering, dressing, and eating are all specifics of the scene,
       and each character operates within the specifics of his or her
       purpose. Connie is the straight man who must keep reminding
       Dingle of the schedule. Dingle’s constant failure to stick with the
       schedule is increasingly exasperating for him. His failures are also
       the sources of humor in the scene. When Connie reminds him of
       the milk, he goes outside to get it and is promptly locked out of the
       apartment. When she reminds him of the paper, he goes outside
160    and again is locked out. When she reminds him to shower, he goes
       into the bathroom but forgets he is holding the coffee when he starts
       to undress. He loses the coffee in the tub. When she asks for coffee,
       he has very little but pours it into her cup anyway. The sequence
       ends with her leaving at 7:30, offering him a lift that he cannot
       accept because he has been unable to get dressed, as he misplaced
       his pants when she told him to make the bed. The contrast between
       these two characters could not be greater. The specific details of the
       scene and the performance and pace of the scene make it an amus-
       ing condemnation of efficiency. Dingle, although enterprising, is
       all too human, as this scene so humorously points out.
           The last excerpt we will focus on is Angel Obregon’s return
       home in “Giant.” Angel is a Hispanic–American hero who has
       come home for burial. His father is an employee of Jordan
       Benedict, and when he was an infant Angel’s life was saved by Leslie
       Benedict, who cared about the well-being of Reatta’s Hispanic
       employees and their families.
           The sequence unfolds slowly, formally. A train at dawn leaves its
       cargo at the station. As the train pulls away, the camera cuts to the
       flag-draped casket on a trolley. A family stands by its side. Soldiers
       approach to wheel the casket to its final destination. More of the
       population of Benedict stands in respect to Angel. Stevens cuts to a
       small boy playing in the foreground who is bored. He represents a
       future Angel. Jordan and Leslie bring a Texas flag to commemorate
       the baby Leslie saved. We cut to the funeral. Here the shots are
       formal—the casket awaiting being lowered into the ground; the
       family and friends behind and to the side; the military honor guard,
       principally Hispanic. The U.S. flag is folded and given to Angel’s


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
