consequently distances the audience from the action and at least
       initially neutralizes the potential for intensity. A director chooses
       the objective camera position to provide information about
       what is going on without choosing a distinct point of view or
       taking sides.


       Subjective Camera Placement
       More often directors choose sides and vest our emotions in one char-
       acter over another. This means using a subjective camera place-
       ment. As already mentioned, Spielberg, Hitchcock, and Polanski
       have used the subjective camera placement to establish identifi-
90
       cation and, in the case of Polanski, a sense of the inner feelings of
       the character, which are vital to building the audience’s relationship
       with the story. Other examples where subjective placement of the
       camera is crucial to how we experience the sequence would be the
       sniper sequence in Stanley Kubrick’s “Full Metal Jacket,” Reuben
       Mamoulian’s “Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde,” and Robert Montgomery’s
       “Lady in the Lake.” In the latter two films, the directors positioned
       the camera as if it were a main character; in fact, this strategy was
       followed throughout “Lady in the Lake.”


       Camera Height
       There are essentially three camera positions that represent the
       extreme options in terms of height. Of course, directors can and
       do choose options somewhere in between the extremes. The first
       extreme is a low camera position. Using such a camera position,
       the viewer looks up at the actors and the action in the shot. This
       “heroic” placement is a favorite in action–adventure, science
       fiction, and Western films. The second option is high placement.
       Extremely high-angle shots might be from the top of a spire or
       palace. Shekhar Kapur in his film “Elizabeth” used high camera
       placement to provide an omniscient view of the action. This type
       of shot can be used to chart the quest for power of those who covet
       power, or it can simply put mere mortals in their place. More
       often a high-angle shot looking down on a character is used to
       signify the loss of power, or enslavement. Stanley Kubrick used
       low-angle as well as high-angle placements to characterize the
       power relationships in “Spartacus,” an epic about a slave revolt


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
