In “2001: A Space Odyssey,” the dawn of man sequence begins in
       timelessness. This translates into extreme long shots that are static and
       give little indication of a change in the time of day as we move from
       one shot to the other. The next scene introduces the ape as a vege-
       tarian. The scene is shared with other animals, and the sequence ends
       with the ape becoming food for the leopard. The pace throughout the
       scene is even, with nothing to indicate a temporal shift. As we move
       through the next scenes, primarily mid shots are used to introduce
       new ideas, such as night implying danger. When we arrive at the
       introduction of the monolith, the camera angles shift and we have a
       shift in the power grid. Pace has entered, albeit modestly.
244        When we arrive at the discovery of the weapon much changes.
       Close-ups emphasize the importance of the bone. A cutaway to
       the monolith introduces a new idea—the power of the stone and the
       potential power of the bone. Once the potential for a weapon has
       been introduced as an idea, rapid cutting to the killing of animals and
       the primacy of the ape follows. Close-ups tell us that the importance
       of the discovery is understood. The rapid pace of the cutting indicates
       that a different sense of time has been established. The sense of time
       is totally changed from the opening scene at the dawn of time.
           Turning to “Barry Lyndon,” the idea once again was to transport
       the audience to a different time, to the different rhythms of the
       18th century. To do so, Kubrick slowed down the pace of the intro-
       duction to “Barry Lyndon.” He moved the camera physically but also
       used a zoom lens in order to lengthen the shots. The result is that,
       instead of shots lasting a few seconds, numerous shots last 30 to 60 sec-
       onds. By the time this first sequence is concluded, we are on 18th-
       centery time, or at least Kubrick’s version of it. He has via an editing
       idea transported us into another sense of time—the dawn of man in
       “2001: A Space Odyssey” and the 18th century in “Barry Lyndon.”
           A second idea Kubrick employed and tried to capture with the
       camera was the restlessness of the Harfords in “Eyes Wide Shut.” He
       used the moving camera to represent that restlessness. When the film
       opens, Bill and Alice are preparing for a party. They leave their spa-
       cious Manhattan apartment to go to the museum-like residence of
       Victor Ziegler. The camera roams before them, recording their rest-
       lessness. At the party, when Bill is preoccupied by two beautiful
       women, the camera again records them moving. Whether the rest-
       lessness implied here equates movement with sexual desire or energy


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
