mysteries of the spiritual. The plot of the outer space sequence is
           the journey of astronaut Dave Bowman (Keir Dullea). The film
           concludes with his death and his rebirth. The dawn of man
           sequence begins in a timeless age. Eventually the ape appears and
           cohabits with other animals, but the quest for food means that the
           less powerful creatures are food for the more powerful ones. Night
           is a time of fear for the community of apes. Rivalries with other com-
           munities of apes, over water, seem to have no resolution. The stone
           is introduced. A deity of sorts, the stone is mysterious. The apes
           gather about it in curiosity and wonderment. A scene follows where
           an ape realizes that a bone can smash other bone. A cutaway to the
236        stone suggests thought, association, perhaps learning and intelli-
           gence. The bone is effective in crushing other bone and other
           prey—food for the families. The formerly vegetarian apes gather at
           night to eat their meat. In another dispute over water, one group of
           apes armed with weapons kill the leader of their adversaries. They
           are victorious and take possession of the water hole. In this
           sequence, timelessness has passed into a progressive sense of time.
           Intelligence, learning, and possession have all come from the stone
           and weaponry. The dawn of man is over. Millions of years and
           man’s history has been presented in a sequence that is less than
           20 minutes.

           “Barry Lyndon” (1975)
           If a kind of progressive arrogance was at the heart of the dawn of
           man sequence, pride and its price are the core of the opening
           sequence of “Barry Lyndon.” Barry Lyndon is a poor Irishman of
           noble birth. His father dies in a duel as the film opens, and Barry
           will become the victim of a duel with his stepson as the film ends.
           In between, Kubrick chronicles the life of a character whose
           choices in life, in Ireland and later in a career and marriage on the
           Continent, are increasingly immoral. In the end, Barry is a victim
           not so much of circumstance as of his own moral weakness. The
           opening sequence focuses on Barry’s love and desire for his own
           cousin, Nora. Initially, she is seductive and encourages his affec-
           tions. In the end, however, she chooses to marry a British captain
           who has the income necessary to restore her and her family to a
           more stable position. Barry does not accept her choice and feels that
           his honor is stained. He challenges the captain to a duel. A sham


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
