The European School

           The European school of acting was not really a reaction to the
           American acting style; rather, it was fueled by a passion for new
           experiences that are more startling, even shocking. The kind of
           experimentation associated with Antonin Artaud and Jerzy
           Grotowski and most powerfully with Peter Brook is most aligned to
           the third Stanislavsky requisite in performance—the spiritual one.
           The work is focused on visceral expressions and reactions to the
           material world (realism). Indeed, directors such as Brook are totally
           disinterested in realism. Madness, religiosity, uninhibited cruelty,
114        the craving for power, transcendence—all of these states were of
           great interest to Brook. Here is where an actor’s performance should
           be pitched. A character’s inner life and the outer world may exist
           but they are unimportant with regard to creating that character.
           Greater forces in the world require a style of performance (behav-
           ior) that is less individual and more tribal, less psychological and
           more anthropological. Understanding these larger forces should
           drive the reading of the play and the performances that articulate
           that reading. In a sense, the result is a communal, social style of per-
           formance as compared to the individualistic, psychological style of
           performance that has dominated the American theater and film.
               In a sense, we can view the Brook style of acting as highly the-
           atrical, searching out the primitive, the historical connections to
           past generations. This style of performance is best captured by the
           work of Julie Taymor. In the theater, she is represented by “The
           Lion King,” and on film she directed “Titus” and “Frida.” Reflected
           in her work is Taymor’s interest in ancient cultures—their arche-
           types for the range of human experience, from fertility to healing to
           celebration to death. For Taymor, life is ritual that connects past and
           future, and her approach to acting seeks out these same values. Her
           work connects her to Brook and to Stanislavsky’s third rail to truth,
           the spiritual. This style of acting is best described as theatrical. Put
           another way, Taymor’s work can be viewed as antimaterialistic and
           acting styles that emphasize the physical or outer world can be con-
           sidered as materialistic or modern. Here the work of playwrights
           such as Neil LaBute, Craig Lucas, and Patrick Marber focus and
           their directors and their actors to approach performance from a per-
           spective different from Taymor.


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
