qualities in Kubrick’s work that pay off in much the same way as
       Sergei Eisenstein’s work. It might be useful to highlight these qual-
       ities before we descend into the darkness that characterizes so much
       of Kubrick’s work. His pay off can be categorized as the shot/scene
       as a visual metaphor and the set piece as a technical challenge.
           Perhaps there is no other Kubrick scene as famous as the ape
       triumphantly throwing his bone weapon into the air, after which the
       camera cuts to a space station in outer space, continuing the move-
       ment albeit millions of years later. Almost as famous is Slim Pickens
       riding a nuclear warhead toward its target in “Dr. Strangelove.”
       Complete with cowboy hat, he is riding the bomb as if it is a bucking
234    bronco. A third example is the circular tracking shot of a master
       sergeant inspecting and humiliating his raw recruits in “Full Metal
       Jacket.” Yet another example is Alex’s beating of his male victim to the
       melodic sound of “Singin’ in the Rain” in “A Clockwork Orange.”
           What is striking in each case is the visual metaphor Kubrick
       created, and in each case that metaphor drips with irony. In the vic-
       torious toss of the bone in “2001: A Space Odyssey,” the metaphor is
       all about technology and progress. The irony here relates to whether
       the discovery of weaponry, with all its implications about proprietary
       rights and the disenfranchisement of others, is really progress. In the
       example from “Dr. Strangelove,” the irony of the metaphor is much
       more apparent. A bomb that is about to kill hundreds of thousands
       of people is not likely to generate quite the same excitement and
       bravado of cowboy life. The third example, from “Full Metal
       Jacket,” also deals with equating military values with societal values.
       The master sergeant is in charge of creating killing machines.
       This is his stated purpose, and in this scene he begins to find out
       who will and who will not become killing machines. The last exam-
       ple, from “A Clockwork Orange,” is as ironic as the shot from
       “Dr. Strangelove.” The “Singin’ in the Rain” music suggests romance
       and love; however, the visuals are all about aggression and hate.
           The set pieces are as audacious in their goals as are the shots/
       scenes; however, the goal is more complex. If the shots/scenes are
       impressive metaphors, the set pieces are rather like a rollercoaster
       ride where the viewer is in the hot seat. From thrills to nausea, the
       goal of the set piece is to give the audience a sense of being there.
       Because the sequences often pose a moral dilemma, the viewer will
       tend to feel queasy and uneasy.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
