Adding Value to a Project

The good director moves beyond the choices made by the compe-
tent director with regard to:


   1. Complexity of the narrative
   2. Approach to characterization
   3. Approach to the narrative
   4. Issue of surprise
   5. Point of view of the director
   6. Camera placement                                                    49

    Whereas the competent director takes a singular approach to
camera placement (e.g., romantic, as in the case of Simon Wincer,
cited in the previous chapter), the good director utilizes more varied
camera placement. Anthony Mann directed film noirs, Westerns,
and epics and is well known for his powerful visualization. Mann
would enhance the dramatic tension and power by alternating
between close-ups and extreme long shots. He also tended to place
the camera close to the action to establish tension between a fore-
ground character (the main character) and a character in the back-
ground (the antagonist). In other words, he used the image itself to
create tension rather than relying on editing and pacing to create the
tension (as Wincer does). This use of visual context for dramatic
intensity is also typical of other good directors, such as John
Frankenheimer, whom we discussed earlier in this chapter, as well
as Roman Polanski and George Stevens, both of whom will be
discussed in later chapters.
    In terms of complexity of the narrative, I suggested in the previ-
ous chapter that the narrative is simplified in both Wincer’s “The
Lighthorsemen” and Michael Bay’s “Pearl Harbor.” Everything is
sacrificed to serve the plot, and the plot provides the same romantic
view of the main character as the camera placement does. Again
turning to Anthony Mann as an example of going further with the
narrative, we look at his first Western, “Winchester ’73” (1950). The
plot follows the fate of a rifle, a Winchester ’73. The rifle is a
much sought after weapon, and it is the prize for the marksmanship
competition that begins the film. The best marksman, the main


                                                      The Good Director
