unorthodox means are necessary to find a killer who is carrying the
disease. When Kazan was trying to capture the danger of the disease
he utilized a theatrical style; when the narrative devolves into a
police story, as in the last scene, Kazan adopted a documentary
approach. Within the theatrical opening scene, the light is expres-
sionistic, the shots formal and stylized. Here, Kazan favored long
and mid shots, except for Kochak, the sick man who is carrying the
disease. Kochak gets the close-ups.
    We see the same principle operating in “On the Waterfront.”
The killing of Joey Doyle, the opening scene, is highly dramatic.
Cantered (i.e., tilted camera angle, off centered) camera positions,
high key light, and very low angles alternating with high angles give       201
the sequence a theatrical dynamic feeling. The hiring scene that
follows shortly, however, is given a documentary feeling to lend a
veracity to the multiple characters and narrative threads introduced
in the scene.
    Turning to the excerpt from “East of Eden,” we have a very
formal scene. Not as theatrical as the opening of “On the
Waterfront,” this opening gives us a mystery. A well-dressed young
man follows a madam to the bank early in the day; the bank has just
opened. He follows her home as well. All these shots are long shots.
The close-ups focus on the gloved hands, the bankbook, and the hat
and shaded face of Kate. The audience is given the impression that
Kate is hiding from something. Whatever it is, a clandestine quality
to Kate is created by the camera position. It is watching Kate but it
does not show us her eyes. All else proceeds more directly. The girl
cleaning Kate’s floors, the handyman just out of sight until called
upon—their presentations illustrate not only who is the boss but
also their dependent position. They rely on Kate for their livelihood.
They are not friends or equals; they are employees, and the visuals
convey as much.
    Cal stands up to the handyman although the man would seem
to be more imposing. Kazan organized the shot to show that the
man is not as powerful as he appears and the boy is more forceful
than he appears. The sequence is simple, yet Kazan succeeded in
creating impressions about both Kate (she has something to hide)
and Cal (he is more than just a kid; he is an angry young man).
Kazan’s use of the camera keeps the narrative clear and captures the
conflictual nature of this relationship between Cal and Kate. The


                                                Elia Kazan: Drama as Life
