Performance, then, is based on feelings within a very narrow
range. John Wayne’s Ringo in “Stagecoach” (1939) is very different
from Gregory Peck’s portrayal of Ringo in Henry King’s “The
Gunfighter” (1951). The latter role is psychologically complex and
realistic in the range of feelings Ringo expresses. The former version
is simply passionate enough to hate and kill and passionate enough
to fall in love. Ford’s character is impulsive and compelling, while
King’s character is soulful and utterly recognizable. Ford’s Ringo
becomes an archetype while King’s Ringo becomes a case study,
albeit an interesting one.

                                                                          143
Directing the Camera

Just as in his work with actors, John Ford’s use of the camera was
distinctive. Although Ford, Eisenstein, Lean, and Kurosawa can be
considered some of the great visualists of the medium, Ford differed
from the others. He did not rely as much on pace and editing as
Eisenstein, Lean, and Kurosawa did, and he favored a static camera.
His long shots are his most memorable images, and he used close-
ups sparingly. In spite of this conservative visual approach, Ford was
quite experimental with his use of lighting and sets.
    To understand the relationship between the director’s idea (a
poetic conception of the hero) we will examine four different
aspects of the visuals in Ford’s work and how each contributed to his
director’s idea. First up is the long shot in our scene from “The
Searchers.” Ford has long been the master of the long shot—Tom
Joad walking down the road at the beginning of “The Grapes of
Wrath,” the cavalry march through a lightning storm in “She Wore
a Yellow Ribbon,” the accident at the coal mine and the women
waiting for news of survivors in “How Green Was My Valley.” In
“The Searchers,” the majority of the search for the cattle, the
discovery of the murder raid, the burial of the Edwards family, and
the subsequent search for the two surviving girls is presented in long
shot. Filming in Monument Valley, Ford shot the men small at the
bottom of the frame and riding forward toward the camera but over-
whelmed by rock abutments and sky. The fact that Ford preferred to
film these scenes at dawn or dusk gives the frame a magical, other-
worldly quality—let’s call it poetic. Because Ford does not pace


                                          John Ford: Poetry and Heroism
