“Rosemary’s Baby” (1968)
In “Rosemary’s Baby,” a young couple looks at an apartment near
Central Park. They love the apartment and take it. The young
woman, Rosemary (Mia Farrow), is keen to have a baby, and her
husband, Guy (John Cassavetes), is intent on advancing his career
as an actor. Rosemary and Guy meet their eccentric neighbors
Minnie and Roman Castevet (Ruth Gordon and Sidney
Blackmer). The elderly couple is taking care of a young woman
who shortly after meeting Rosemary commits suicide. As the
Castevets become a more significant part of their lives, Rosemary
and Guy pursue their individual, seemingly mutually exclusive
agendas, much to the frustration of Rosemary. However, eventually       221
the increasingly distant Guy agrees to have a baby. Minnie provides
Rosemary with an old charm necklace that contains an aromatic
tannis root. She is ready to be impregnated (but not by Guy). At a
special dinner given by the young couple, Minnie and Roman pro-
vide the dessert. The chocolate mousse is drugged, and after
Rosemary falls unconscious she is prepared by Guy for the rape
that will follow. With his minion present, the Devil rapes
Rosemary. Although Guy claims he was the one who did it, he has
made a bargain with the Devil. Both the pregnancy and his career
advance quickly. The Castevets makes sure one of their doctors
cares for Rosemary, and any barriers (e.g., Rosemary’s friend
Hutch) are eliminated. In the end, alone, Rosemary has the child-
devil. She is aware that she has been a victim but motherly instinct
prevails—she will care for her child. The sequence we will focus
on here is the abandonment of Rosemary by Guy, which highlights
her aloneness, Guy’s success as an actor (his competitor for a role
suddenly goes blind), and the preparations for becoming pregnant.
The sequence concludes with the rape and its aftermath, Guy
claiming to have had intercourse with his unconscious wife and
explaining the scratches on her back by his drunkenness and his
being carried away as a result.


“Chinatown” (1974)
The second excerpt is from “Chinatown,” which is set in 1930s
Los Angeles. A private detective, Jake Gittes (Jack Nicholson), is
hired to look into the infidelity of a husband, Hollis Mulwray


                           Roman Polanski: The Aloneness of Existence
