implications for text interpretation. First, the focus of Lubitsch’s
           work will be on one character’s relationship with another, a woman
           with a man or a man with a woman. As I mentioned earlier,
           Lubitsch was interested in all dimensions of romance, but in all his
           explorations the emphasis was always on the emotional aspects of
           romance and the pursuit of Lubitsch’s version of happiness. Bliss is
           finally securing the desired relationship. In Ninotchka’s case, she
           never knew about men like Leon d’Algout, but when she was sent
           to Paris, the city of love, she discovers what love can be. Similarly,
           Madame Colet in “Trouble in Paradise” discovers love when the
           thief Gaston enters her house with the goal of robbing her.
182            In order to create this aching sense of the value of romance,
           Lubitsch works with a number of narrative devices that highlight
           the importance of romance. First, the principle of opposites oper-
           ates on the lovers as well as with the rest of the cast. For lovers and
           would-be lovers, Leon d’Algout and Ninotchka are the most obvious
           examples, as are Clara and Kralik in “The Shop Around the
           Corner”—she is emotional, and he is rational; she is kinetic, and he
           is steady; she is idealistic, and he has a darker outlook.
               As we look at the love triangles in the films, the opposites
           become even more striking. In “Trouble in Paradise,” Gaston must
           choose between Lily and Madame Colet. Lily is a thief who is
           pragmatic about money. Madame Colet is rich and thoroughly
           impractical about money. In “To Be or Not To Be,” Maria flirts with
           a young, handsome flyer as her jealous older husband doubts his
           wife’s love. Both men, although opposites, feed Maria’s vanity.
               Lubitsch also uses the idea of opposites as a source of humor out-
           side the romantic couple. The lovers and would-be lovers are serious
           when the surround is not serious. Edward Everett Horton and Charles
           Ruggles portray two rich elderly suitors for Madame Colet, although
           her preference is for Gaston. In “Ninotchka,” the three trade commis-
           sioners (Iranoff, Bulganoff, and Kopalski), with their self-deceptive
           interpretation of Soviet cant and self-indulgent interpretation of
           Western capitalism, are a source of humor, just as the theatrical com-
           pany surrounding Joseph and Maria Tura is the source of humor in
           “To Be or Not To Be.” This strategy provides a layered narrative with-
           out detracting from the seriousness of the couple seeking romance.
               Another element of Lubitsch’s text interpretation is how he avoided
           idealizing a character. It may be that romantic love is idealized but not


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
