“The Lost Weekend” (1945)
The first excerpt we will explore is the opening of “The Lost
Weekend.” We see New Yorker Don Birnam hide a bottle outside
of his window while he packs to go to Connecticut with his brother
(Phillip Terry) for the weekend. In Connecticut, Don will write,
and his brother will make sure he does not drink. Helen, Don’s
fiancée, comes over to wish him well. She is going to a concert that
afternoon. Don convinces his brother to accompany her, and sug-
gests that they meet for the later night train. The brother is wary,
but Don berates both the brother and his fiancée for not trusting
him. When the brother finds the bottle of alcohol, however, an
argument ensues, during which it is clear that Don badly wants a            165
drink. His brother empties the bottle. The brother has tried to alco-
hol proof Don’s life in other ways; for example, Don has no money
to buy more alcohol, and his brother will not give him any. Clearly,
Don is supported almost entirely by his brother. Exasperated by the
failure of all of his efforts, the brother goes off to the concert with
Helen, while Don can only think of where his next drink is com-
ing from.

“Sunset Boulevard” (1950)
The next excerpt we will explore takes place at the end of “Sunset
Boulevard.” In a fit of jealousy and rage, Norma Desmond has shot
and killed Joe Gillis (nobody leaves Norma Desmond). The police
attempt to talk to Norma but she is mute. Her manservant (Erich
Von Stroheim) is aware of the large gathering of media downstairs,
waiting to shoot lurid footage for the evening news. He suggests that
Norma will respond to the cameras, and the police agree to take
Norma downstairs. When he tells Norma that the cameras are wait-
ing, she is engaged and alert but still in her own reality. She
descends the stairs and responds to the cameras as if she were per-
forming. At the bottom of the stairs, she expresses her happiness.
She is ready for her close-up. The film ends as she moves toward the
cameras, certain she will never again leave her fans.

“The Apartment” (1960)
The third excerpt I will use occurs early in “The Apartment.” The
scene establishes how much C.C. Baxter is willing to sacrifice for
his ambition. The sequence has four parts. The first establishes how

                                         Billy Wilder: Existence at Stake
