act, the rich Mr. Kebabian tries to have Stavros deported from his
America-bound ship back to Turkey. Each of these men stands as
a barrier to Stavros’ dream of going to America to create his own
destiny. Collectively, they represent an adult power structure that
wants Stavros to remain powerless. Together, they intensify the
character and constancy of opposition to Stavros’ inner goal of
being a free man.
    The final characteristic that distinguishes Kazan’s work is that
he was a director of great scenes—not visual set pieces such as the
battle on the ice in Eisenstein’s “Alexander Nevsky” or the burial
scene in David Lean’s “Doctor Zhivago,” but dramatic scenes
emanating out of the director’s work with his actors. Consider the           193
taxi scene in “On the Waterfront,” one of the most famous scenes in
filmmaking. Kazan is very modest about the evolution of the scene
(see E. Kazan, My Life, Doubleday, 1988, pp. 524–525). Essentially,
Terry is being taken for a ride, in more ways than one, by his
brother, Charlie. Charlie’s task is to convince Terry not to talk to
the crime commission; if he cannot talk Terry out of it he, Terry,
will be killed. When Terry accuses Charlie of a lifetime of betrayal
(“I could have been a contender but instead . . .”), he lets Terry go
free, knowing it will mean his own death. Brotherly love, personal
confession, moment of truth—the scene is all of these and more
because the performances breathe a level of humanity into a scene
that is magical.
    Other key scenes created in Kazan films include the nightclub
anti-Semitic confrontation scene with Dave (John Garfield) and
Skylar Green (Gregory Peck) in “Gentleman’s Agreement,” the
collapse of Lonesome Rhodes’ career in “A Face in the Crowd,” and
the next scene that I will detail from “Panic in the Streets,” which is
a police story with an unusual twist. The murder victim, Kochak,
died of two bullets but would have died anyway—he was carrying a
pneumonic plague and could have spread the disease. The killers
must be found because they have been exposed to the plague. The
killer, Blackie (Jack Palance), and his associate, Raymond Fitch
(Zero Mostel), are convinced that the victim was bringing some-
thing valuable into the country. Their other associate, Vince Poldi
(Tommy Cook), is the victim’s cousin. In one scene, Blackie is
trying to get the secret out of Poldi. The problem is that Poldi is now
bedridden; in fact, he is dying of the plague. The scene plays out, as


                                                 Elia Kazan: Drama as Life
