What does draw Breillat to close-ups is violence. In the last scene
       of “Romance,” which focuses on the birth of Marie’s child, Breillat
       uses close-ups. The head of the baby as it emerges from the vagina
       is an intense close-up that is followed by the full emergence of the
       baby. As presented, this moment is about birth as violence to the
       mother’s body.
           The kiss of actor and actress on the beach in “Sex Is Comedy” is
       shot as a close-up that illustrates the hatred of one character for the
       other. Similarly, Breillat used a close-up to reveal the breast of the
       actress on the beach. Given the temperature, this shot implies not
       passion but cold weather. The depiction of violence and its part-
298    nership with acts of intimacy, even love, supports Breillat’s director’s
       idea and does not yield insight into her characters.
           Breillat also uses camera placement and editing to create a sense
       of violence. In “Fat Girl,” the editing style up until the drive back to
       Paris was very relaxed, but then the style shifts abruptly. The mother
       is very angry with the older daughter, Elena, but seems to save all
       her ire for Anaïs. The shots from the point of view of Anaïs or the
       mother are of the traffic, particularly the trucks. Often their
       Mercedes seems surrounded by trucks. The sequence also focuses
       on the mother’s anger. She is smoking almost continually. She does
       not turn on the radio when Anaïs requests it, but later she turns on
       the music very loud, much to the annoyance of Anaïs. Anaïs
       purchasing food, eating, and being sick—all are visually included.
       Elena seems exceedingly worried whether her mother will tell her
       father what happened and whether they will force her to be med-
       ically examined. By jump cutting, by focusing on the number and
       proximity of the trucks, Breillat creates a sense of impending
       violence. Consequently, the trip seems almost unbearable and
       dangerous. When the mother stops the car at night to rest, it is
       almost a relief. This momentary peace does not last long, however.
       Elena goes to the restroom, and a truck pulls in. The driver eyes
       them and then smashes the window with an axe and does the same
       to Elena. The violence continues unabated until the police find
       Anaïs. In this sequence, Breillat used camera placement and an
       editing strategy to prepare us for the violence.
           In tying murder and rape to a narrative about an obese girl who
       is the scapegoat of her family, Breillat created her most overpower-
       ing realization of her director’s idea. Here, sexuality is at the core of


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
