joins the project in the writing or pre-production phase and does not
     leave the project until post-production. Thus, the director may well
     be involved in all aspects of the editing phase, such as sound design,
     music composition, recording, and mixing into the overall sound,
     until the film is completed. In other words, the director is responsi-
     ble for the creative supervision of the film from early in its concep-
     tion to its completion. The director will work most closely with the
     producer, who is responsible for the organizational and financial
     supervision of the film from its conception to its conclusion.
        In the pre-production phase, the director may either play a sec-
     ondary role to the scriptwriter or partner with the writer. The exact
4    nature of the role depends on the director’s track record, influence,
     and interest. There is no such variability in the production phase,
     when the director is clearly in charge. Interpretation of the screen-
     play, blocking, breakdown of the script into specific shots, and mod-
     ulation of the performances of actors are some of the specific
     responsibilities of the director in the production phase. In the post-
     production phase, the director’s interest or influence will either
     expand or reduce the director’s involvement. Generally, directors
     are quite involved in this phase even though editors (picture and
     sound) are driving many decisions.
        What should be emphasized, however, is that writers, directors, and
     editors share one goal—to tell the story as effectively as possible—but
     their contributions differ. Writers use words, directors use camera shots
     and performances, and editors use visuals and sound to tell the story.


     Who Is the Director?

     Directors, as with every other profession, come in all different
     shapes and sizes. Whether they are male or female, Western,
     Eastern, Spanish, or American, their uniqueness is a result of the
     mix of each director’s beliefs, experiences, interests, and character.
     Some directors are playful (think of Federico Fellini). Some are
     deadly serious (think of Ingmar Bergman). Some prefer particular
     genres (think of Clint Eastwood). Some seem to thrive on a diver-
     sity of genres (think of Howard Hawks). Some are political (think
     of Sergei Eisenstein). Some are apolitical (think of Blake Edwards).
     Some prefer comedy (think of Woody Allen). And some try to alternate


The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
