greater the consciousness of the director with regard to what the
      director’s idea is and how to apply it, the better, the clearer, and the
      more powerful the outcome.
          The tools that the director uses are text interpretation, directing
      the actors, and directing the camera shot selection. The director can
      value one of these tools over the other or use them equally.
      Whichever he chooses, these three tools are the prism through
      which he filters the thousands of choices he will have to make in the
      course of a production. What I am suggesting is that a clear, articu-
      lated director’s idea will help sharpen the focus and purpose of those
      thousands of decisions.
14        Here we come to the hierarchy that this book creates as its pathway
      to great directing. The presumption here, as elsewhere in life, is that
      some people are better at their jobs than others. In addition to our
      three categories of competent, good, and great, we could add another
      for those who misunderstand directing or are unable to function as
      directors. Let us call them ill-suited and unsuccessful in their goal of
      directing. Of course, our categories of competent, good, and great are
      subjective, so I put forward the following criteria.
          The competent director tells a clear story, even an effective story,
      but the audience’s experience of the film is single-layered and flat.
      A film directed by the competent director can be commercially
      successful and the director’s career can be a rewarding one, but
      even from the directorial perspective the experience is flat. A com-
      petent director is technically competent and produces shots that are
      useful to a clear edit and performances that are credible within the
      parameters the director has set for the film. The competent director
      provides a kind of technical baseline for the purposes of this book.
          The good director gives the audience a more complex experi-
      ence, a layered experience. The layering may be generated from a
      more complex text interpretation, such as a modern main character
      in a classic Western, for example. The layering may arise from mod-
      ulation of the actors’ performances; Elia Kazan, the great director of
      performers, utilized this kind of strategy. Or the director might use a
      broader variety of shots, wide-angle foreground–background shots
      rather than mid two shots or extreme long shots rather than the antic-
      ipated close-ups. Whatever the choice, the good director seeks out a
      director’s idea that will deepen meaning, add subtext, and compli-
      cate the narrative.


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
