narrative more dynamic or a youthfully exuberant narrative more
contained and reflective. In either case, the opportunity to surprise
the audience makes a clear case for exploring this option.


Male/Female

I have already mentioned Jane Smiley–Jocelyn Moorhouse’s
“A Thousand Acres” as an example of a shift in perspective; in this
case, the daughters of the Lear character are the point of view rather
than the father, as in the original presentation of King Lear.
Because the male/female struggle for power is one of the most sig-          81
nificant social/psychological/ political issues of the day (at least
since the sexual revolution of the 1960s), the issue of a male or
female reading of a text has taken on a far greater weight.
    Although the screwball comedy (comedy of male/female role
reversal) is no longer a staple of contemporary genre films, the
examination of male/female roles is central to important films from
all over the world. In the British film “The Full Monty,” unem-
ployed men adopt the long-standing female economic strategy of
stripping to make a living. In the Japanese “Shall We Dance”
(remade in the United States under the same title), an unsatisfied
man takes dance lessons to awaken himself; such a strategy in the
Japanese male-dominated macho culture is downright feminine. In
France’s “French Twist,” a beautiful woman takes a lesbian lover to
punish her serially unfaithful husband, who eventually returns to
her. Coline Serreau, famous for her gender-bending film “Three
Men and a Baby,” rejoined the gender war with renewed passion
in France’s “Chaos.” All of these films are situation comedies.
“Mrs. Doubtfire” and “Tootsie” are two Hollywood examples of
films that explore the gender wars.
    Because power is a core issue for society and because it is fluid
and impermanent, at least in terms of gender, the notion of applying
a gender interpretation to a text is simply smart. Men and women do
not see events and character the same way, but all want to be on the
side of the angels and believe they are empathetic to the other sex.
Consequently, telling a male story from a woman’s point of view or
a female story from a male point of view or, better yet, revealing the
male and female dimensions of a main character is compelling.


                                                      Text Interpretation
