invites her out to a club, picks up a man, gets paid for sex, and
       promptly gives the money to Lilja. Her own father would kill her if
       he knew the truth. Lilja’s reputation is tarnished for prostituting her-
       self even though it was not her. She throws away the money given
       her. The world continues to close in on Lilja even though she has
       tried to be a 15 year old with a self-respect and morality absent in her
       peers and the adults in her life.
           All she has on her side is one friend, a younger boy named
       Volodya (“glue and vodka”). Volodya (Artyom Bogucharsky) and
       Lilja form a friendship without sex, a friendship that is for each
       their only shield against total abandonment. Volodya is clearly
280    abused by his family and persecuted by a gang of boys who roam
       the neighborhood. As if Lilja’s situation was not bad enough, she
       receives a formal letter via the welfare authorities that her mother
       has given up all rights and responsibilities for Lilja. She is devas-
       tated and without means. The electricity is turned off in the hovel
       that is her apartment.
           At this stage she turns to selling herself to men for money. She
       uses the money to buy a basketball for Volodya, an act of kindness
       toward an otherwise suicidal young boy. At this stage, she meets a
       young man in a club. The man treats her with kindness and she
       believes that, at last, someone will be kind and caring. But he is
       leaving for Sweden to work. He invites her to go with him.
           Believing this is the beginning of a better life, she agrees. She
       says goodbye to Volodya who after she leaves feels totally abandoned
       and commits suicide. At the last minute, Lilja’s young man tells her
       he cannot leave today but has arranged a flight and papers for her.
       He will soon follow. She goes to Stockholm.
           In Stockholm, she is picked up at the airport but quickly discov-
       ers the young man’s true intentions—a prisoner, she must now work
       as a prostitute. She rebels but is beaten into a life of imprisonment
       and prostitution. She is never let out of the apartment except to turn
       tricks. Life has become even more despairing. Without friends,
       without means, without dignity, Lilja tries to run away but fails. Her
       last act of self-respect is to take her own life. She is visited by
       Volodya with wings and the two play together, now both winged
       and free at last in death. The excerpt I will focus on is the last 10
       minutes of the film, the events leading up to Lilja’s suicide and
       liberation.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
