Brando’s performances in “A Streetcar Named Desire” and “On the
Waterfront” are transcendent in their importance to film perfor-
mance. Anthony Quinn as Zapata’s brother in “Viva Zapata,” Zero
Mostel as Raymond Fitch in “Panic in the Streets” (1950), James
Dean as Cal Trask in “East of Eden,” and Andy Griffith as
Lonesome Rhodes in “A Face in the Crowd” are no less accom-
plished. Also, Natalie Wood, Kim Hunter, Julie Harris, Patricia
Neal, Barbara Bel Geddes, and Lee Remick were all compelling
in their performances for Kazan. Rod Steiger, Lee J. Cobb,
Eli Wallach, and Karl Malden became stars because of their
work in secondary roles in Kazan films. James Dean, Warren Beatty,
and Marlon Brando became superstars because of their work in                 191
Kazan films.
    A second characteristic of Kazan’s work is how he embraced
a style to evoke his director’s idea. Often this meant a combination
of two extremes—an almost documentary-like approach combined
with a highly theatrical or expressionist style. “Panic in the Streets,”
“A Face in the Crowd,” and “On the Waterfront” exhibit these
extremes of style. “A Streetcar Named Desire” on the other hand is
strictly theatrical, with no reference to realism. Perhaps the most
fully realized execution of this mixed style is “America, America.”
The interesting question is why Kazan utilized two such opposite
styles in the same film—which brings us back to the director’s idea.
An explanation of why Kazan merged two very different approaches
is that life is inescapably real, but drama requires a more expres-
sionistic, visual presentation. Occasionally, this technique derailed
into stylization and stiffness, such as in “Viva Zapata,” but when it
worked, as in “A Face in the Crowd,” the fusion of the two styles
raises the work to a powerful level. Other directors such as John
Frankenheimer and Sydney Lumet have also worked with this
stylistic mix to good result.
    A third characteristic of Kazan’s work is his use of an inner
demon/outer devil approach to the main character and his antago-
nistic relationships. Although somewhat psychoanalytic, this notion
helps us look at the restless energy of all of his characters and their
explosive emotional clashes. First, let us look at Kazan’s main
characters. Whether we consider Terry Malloy (Marlon Brando)
in “On the Waterfront,” Cal Trask (James Dean) in “East of Eden,”
or Stavros Topouzoglou (Stathis Giallelis) in “America, America,”


                                                 Elia Kazan: Drama as Life
