ambition. Within three years he was making “Spartacus,” a major
Hollywood epic, and although he lost control of the film to its
star/producer Kirk Douglas, the film remains one of the great epics
to be produced by Hollywood.
    Kubrick’s narrative ambition grew exponentially. In 1962, he
produced “Lolita,” based on Nabokov’s verboten love classic.
He followed that film with his classic about nuclear holocaust,
“Dr. Strangelove,” and reached his pinnacle shortly thereafter with
“2001: A Space Odyssey,” a film about nothing less than all of
human history and our future. Five years later, “A Clockwork
Orange,” his translation of Burgess’ novel, seems less ambitious but
only in comparison to his own “2001: A Space Odyssey” film. The         239
film remains the ultimate parable about private aggression and pub-
lic or governmental control of that aggression. The film ended his
serious phase of films about adolescent angst. “Barry Lyndon” was
of course a return to a larger palate. The tale of Barry Lyndon, or
Redmond Barry, as he begins life is the basis for a more general nar-
rative about 18th-century European life, particularly with regard to
the role of money in the course of the life of the noble class.
Thackeray and his film translator Kubrick proposed that money—
its necessity, the means of acquiring it, and the means necessary to
hold on to it—altered man’s nature. It certainly did in the case of
Barry Lyndon. The life of the title character allowed Kubrick to
comment on the transitional period when romantic values were
transformed into something altogether more modern, more dark.
    “The Shining,” “Full Metal Jacket,” and “Eyes Wide Shut,” all
set in the here and now, are each specific in character but general
in their implications of loss. Both “The Shining” and “Full Metal
Jacket” articulate a loss of innocence. A writer isolated by his work
as the custodian of a closed resort loses his mind in “The Shining.”
A writer, Joker, struggles to sustain his conscience and humanity in
the midst of soldiering in “Full Metal Jacket.” Finally, in “Eyes
Wide Shut,” it is the ample culture of narcissism that is under
attack. The Harfords’ life is materially rich—this is the specific.
The generality enters when the search for spiritual richness is mis-
interpreted as the search for sexual gratification. No spiritual
rewards here, only death and disappointment. Again, the specific
was broadened into a generality as Kubrick looked for the large
themes of modern life.


                         Stanley Kubrick: The Darkness of Modern Life
