In terms of the performance of the actors, in Chapter 4
           I described Elia Kazan’s strategy in “Splendor in the Grass.” The text
           is all about sexual desire and the powerful inhibition parents can
           have on their children. Deanie and Bud are in love. Her parents are
           poor. His father is a self-made man. Deanie’s mother says sex before
           marriage is wrong, and sex is not pleasurable for women anyway.
           Bud’s father says sex is necessary but marriage is about consolidating
           wealth and power, not love. He is implying that Bud should marry
           with an eye on climbing the social ladder, not for love. Kazan stages
           consecutive scenes between the children and their parents. The text
           says “don’t,” but in each scene Kazan’s staging communicates the
320        opposite. Deanie physically clings to her mother as she offers her
           daughter advice. Bud’s father physically pummels Bud, albeit both
           aggressively and affectionately, while he advises him. In both cases,
           the physical (desire) outweighs what is being said (delay desire; go for
           power). The directorial choice is empathetic to the desire both Bud
           and Deanie feel; here, performance tells us about the director’s idea.
               In Chapter 3, which discusses camera placement and how
           the elements of the shot are organized to convey the director’s
           idea, I mentioned the bombing shots from “Pearl Harbor” and
           “Dr. Strangelove.” In “Pearl Harbor,” the bomb from a Japanese
           airplane is dropped on a ship below. As the bomb drops toward the
           ship, the camera takes the view of the bomb. The image is concep-
           tual but in the end it simply elicits a sensation rather than deeper
           feelings. I compared this shot to the nuclear bomb being dropped
           from the B52 in “Dr. Strangelove.” Slim Pickens’ character has opted
           to ride the bomb to its destination. Wearing a cowboy hat, he rides
           the bomb as though it is a wild bull. He is all excitement trying to
           tame the bomb/bull. Whether we view the shot ironically, whether
           we consider the character to be demented or a macho cowboy to the
           end, the image stays with us long after the film has ended. Kubrick
           transformed a narrative action—bombing the target—into another
           level of meaning. Whether we view it as an anti-war or anti-cowboy
           mythology and mentality, the shot is transformative. It has become
           more than the sum of its narrative parts. Good directing and great
           directing use the camera, the performances, and the interpretation
           of the text in just such ways.
               It has not been my intention in this book to create a hierarchy of
           directors, but it has been my intention to suggest that great directing


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
