keys, their badges. The association here is that these humans
       mean to do no good. The extraterrestrials are childlike and poten-
       tial victims, and the humans are adult and victimizers. This
       revised perception of aliens is accomplished without words and
       without close-ups.


       Directing the Actors

       Casting is critical in the Spielberg film. Main characters are often
       cast for their ordinary look. They should not stand out in the crowd.
254    Harrison Ford in the “Indiana Jones” series, Tom Hanks in “Saving
       Private Ryan,” Sam Neill in “Jurassic Park,” Dennis Weaver in
       “Duel,” and Roy Scheider in “Jaws” each has an everyman appear-
       ance. Neither heroic nor intimidating, these actors project decency.
       Women are cast for their youthful spunkiness, not Katharine
       Hepburn sophistication nor Barbara Stanwyck sexuality. These
       actresses have a look that is compatible with the rather ordinary-
       looking actors they play opposite of. Spielberg understandably casts
       and works with children more often than most directors. As ordinary
       as the adult main characters seem to be, all of Spielberg’s child
       characters seem extraordinary—think of Henry Thomas and Drew
       Barrymore in “E.T.” and Joel Haley Osment in “Artificial
       Intelligence: AI.”
          Spielberg always casts at least one larger than life character—
       Robert Shaw in “Jaws,” Denholm Elliott in “Raiders of the Lost
       Ark,” Sean Connery in “Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade,” and
       Richard Attenborough in “Jurassic Park.” These characters provide
       the charisma lacking in the other adult main characters.
          In terms of the performances themselves, Spielberg keeps them
       in the low key to charming range, like a young shy boy trying to
       please. In this way, they do not undermine the dynamic plot, and they
       do not complicate the audience’s response to the character. Examples
       of performances or characters who invite a more complicated
       response would include George Clooney as a charming criminal
       in Steven Soderbergh’s “Out of Sight” and Tom Cruise as the
       contract killer in Michael Mann’s “Collateral.” Occasionally,
       Spielberg will try a more complex characterization, such as Richard
       Dreyfuss in “Close Encounters of the Third Kind” and Ralph Fiennes


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
