goals that they bring about change in the main character. This is
their arc in the narrative. Let’s look at this process more specifically.
    Let’s start with the capacity to transform. In most films, we are
presented with a situation that forces the main character to adapt.
When a daughter is kidnapped by Indians in Ron Howard’s “The
Missing,” what will the main character, the mother, do? A second
example is “Spiderman 2.” Spiderman is so busy keeping the peace
that the love of his life leaves him for someone else. What will
Spiderman do? The audience must believe that the mother in “The
Missing” and Spiderman in “Spiderman 2” are capable of change.
Something about each character has to be in sufficient flux that we
believe each will act.                                                      109
    The next question is how does a character transform? Or, to put
it another way, what propels a character along the character arc?
From a narrative point of view, one of two story elements moves the
main character to change. The first element is relationships. Think
of Juliette Lewis’ character, who was the catalyst for change in
Johnny Depp’s character in Lasse Hallström’s “What’s Eating
Gilbert Grape?” The second element is plot. Plot applies pressure
to the goal of the main character. Think of the decision made by
Michael (played by Dustin Hoffman) to pretend he is a female
actress in Sydney Pollack’s “Tootsie.” Michael, a failed actor,
becomes an overnight star in a television soap, but as his career
soars his impersonation of a woman modifies his male tendencies to
lie and manipulate. As he puts it at the end, being a woman was the
best part of the person Michael has become.
     Main characters are always transformed, and their character arc
forms the emotional spine of the film. Secondary characters can also
change, but their transformations are in the service of the main char-
acter. Think of the confession made by Charlie (Rod Steiger) to his
brother in the car ride in Elia Kazan’s “On the Waterfront.”
Throughout the narrative, to satisfy his mob boss, Charlie has con-
tinually manipulated his brother Terry (Marlon Brando). Now trying
to manipulate Terry one last time, Charlie realizes how much he has
harmed his brother. He decides against the ultimate intimidation,
Terry’s murder, and opts to let his brother live, although it will mean
death for Charlie. This sacrifice is Charlie’s transformation, his sin-
gle act of brotherly love. Because Charlie’s death will prompt Terry
to testify against the mob, Charlie’s action (and relationship) has


                                                                   The Actor
