material. Performance was one of Lubitsch’s strengths as a director,
           but underneath that performance Lubitsch was also able to elicit the
           joy of performance in the film. This joy, whether it arose from the
           character or the actor creating a character, was the real key to expe-
           riencing the performances in a Lubitsch film. The audience catches
           onto the pleasure of these performers. They are having a great time
           creating these characters, and the audience has an equally great time
           experiencing their creations.


           Directing the Camera
184
           Lubitsch was one of those directors who seems on first look to have
           a very simple approach. There is no urgent editing. The camera is
           placed before the action and at the requisite moment is moved
           closer to record a close-up. But, behind this simplicity is a director
           of enormous sophistication. I have already mentioned Lubitsch’s
           capacity to use a visual for multiple purposes (the Lubitsch touch).
           Probably more helpful is exchanging the word “simplicity” with
           “economy.” Lubitsch seems to achieve in one or two shots what
           requires one or two scenes for most directors. Only Luis Bunuel
           seemed as adept at conveying so much with so little. A few examples
           will illustrate my point.
               In “Trouble in Paradise,” François (Edward Everett Horton)
           characterizes the thief who stole his wallet in Venice as a doctor.
           Later, the major (Charles Ruggles) mistakes Gaston Monescu for a
           doctor, and when the François character comes to realize that
           Gaston and the doctor and the thief are the same person, the end
           is near for our charming thief. The same pattern emerges in the
           way the jewels are viewed in “Ninotchka.” Initially, the jewels
           occupy a key role in the plot. The sale of the jewels is the reason
           why the Russian trade commission has come to Paris. Stopping the
           sale of the jewels brings Leon into contact with the three Soviet
           trade commissioners, and eventually those jewels will become a
           barrier to his relationship with Ninotchka. As they become less of
           a barrier, their sale becomes an expression of Countess Swana’s
           jealousy toward Ninotchka, and finally their sale becomes the
           Countess’ means of getting Ninotchka back to Moscow and away
           from Leon.


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
