Whenever possible, Arcand presents the public face of a hospital
      or the police and then undermines this rule or that rule with a
      humane response or outcome. It is as if Arcand is saying that there
      are rules (about heroin, for example) that simply do not apply when
      a citizen who ordinarily lives by the rules is dying. The strategy then
      becomes a more moral one, a more humane one. As a result, in this
      film we see businessmen, nurses, and policemen transgress to help
      an academic die without pain and with dignity. This is the experi-
      ence of “The Barbarian Invasions,” which presents law and social
      order as barriers to what is best for the individual, and transgression
      is seen as moral and humane. This is Arcand’s transformation.
68        The director’s idea in “Jesus of Montreal” is even more pro-
      nounced and transgressive. The artist’s role is taken by a radical
      actor who is asked to stage the Passion play. The play is to be per-
      formed in the open on a mountain in Montreal. The sponsor is the
      church, and the producer is a priest, who is having an affair with an
      acting school classmate of “Jesus.” “Jesus” gathers a group of actors,
      among whom one has been lending his voice to dubbing foreign
      pornographic films and another has been “prostituting” herself in
      beauty commercials. When the cast has been assembled and the
      Passion play is performed, the roles ennoble the actors and they
      become the characters they are portraying. “Jesus” becomes the rad-
      ical critic of all things materialistic. He disrupts the production of a
      commercial (an attack on the Temple clerics and their activities),
      and the actresses become Mary and Mary Magdalene. They have
      found grace and they turn against the lives they have led. This ter-
      rifies the priest who has produced the play. He shuts the play down
      mid-performance. Jesus is badly injured and is taken to the hospital
      by the two actresses, but he walks away only to die in the local sub-
      way station. He dies as Jesus did, for the sins of others—the priest,
      the “priests” of the media, and producers and directors who exploit
      their actors and the public.
          As in “The Barbarian Invasions,” it is difficult to distinguish
      between a play being performed by actors and the actors who
      become the characters they are portraying, and Arcand speaks
      directly to us about values. In “Jesus of Montreal,” he gives us a
      classic and modern passion play in which “Jesus”/Arcand, the
      character/voice of the writer/director, forces us to question our
      values. For Arcand, the choice is clear: Modern material values


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
