work in “Splendor in the Grass.” His work with Jack Palance and
           Zero Mostel in “Panic in the Streets,” Raymond Massey and James
           Dean in “East of Eden,” and Marlon Brando and Rod Steiger in
           “On the Waterfront” produced legendary performances by mythol-
           ogized performers. All of the performances are driven by the
           conflict between the character trying to achieve a goal and the vigor
           of the forces opposing him. The interpretation keys the perfor-
           mances. The clash of drama and psychology, so forcefully utilized
           by Kazan, highly energizes these films.
               The same holds true for the work of Mary Harron in “I Shot Andy
           Warhol” and “American Psycho,” where the energy is generated by
322        the performances of Lili Taylor and Christian Bale. The characters’
           inner and outer lives are at war, and the battlegrounds—haves versus
           have-nots, celebrities versus non-celebrities, men versus women—
           energize these films. From an interpretive point of view, Harron’s
           choice of genres—docudrama and fable—adds her own contrarian
           views that conflict with those of the characters. In both films, the
           characters want celebrity, but Harron illustrates the emptiness of
           their goal by displaying the banality of Warhol and his acolytes, as
           well as that of the corporate vice presidents. Her voice conflicts with
           the characters’ goals, and the intentions of the characters are pre-
           sented as ironic rather than as something we can identify with or care
           about. In these films, neither Solanas nor Bateman gains happiness
           or understanding as a result of their actions, but Harron has put their
           actions to good purpose to energize her dark narratives.
               If politics is the key transformative device in the films of Breillat
           and Von Trotta and energy is the key transformative device in the
           works of Kazan and Harron, it is the romantic subtext that is trans-
           formative in the work of Ernst Lubitsch and Billy Wilder. Again,
           performance and text interpretation propel the subtext deeper into
           the films. Because Lubitsch specialized in romantic comedy, on
           first glance my claim may seem confusing. Let me explain.
           Although the films follow the course of a relationship between a
           man and a woman, the course of that relationship is always under-
           pinned by the subtext. In “Trouble in Paradise,” the lovers in the
           end have more in common with one another than the challenger
           Madame Colet could ever hope for, and the fact that both of the
           lovers are thieves saves the romantic relationship. In “To Be or Not
           To Be,” the shared narcissism saves the relationship of Joseph and


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
