something it is not. The rest of the courses are very spicy and heavy
and thoroughly inappropriate for the hottest day of the year. Stevens
is also specific in the conflicting roles each participant plays.
Mother is thrilled Arthur has come for dinner. For her, it is a
triumph and she acts accordingly. Father is uncomfortable in his
tuxedo and does not consider dinner to be a social occasion. Alice
is nervous that all will fall apart. Arthur remains silent, having heard
before attending this dinner that Alice’s father is a thief (who stole
a manufacturing process from his former employer, Mr. Lamm,
another font of wealth in this small town). And the maid who serves
the food is indifferent to the competing interests at the table; for her,
tonight is just a job.                                                      159
    Specific details beyond the food courses and the emotional state
of the participants include Arthur sweating profusely from the food
and the temperature, Mr. Adams’ failure to present himself as a
convincing success (the buttons on his tuxedo shirt pop and his shirt
opens to reveal his bare chest), and the maid’s failing uniform
and her growing impatience with the pretensions of her employers.
All these details are presented in close-up. To present the emotional
arc of the scene (growing disaster) Stevens relied on Alice to be
the barometer. He used Walter, Alice’s brother, to bring the sense of
disaster to a peak. Near the end of the meal, Walter enters and
invites his father into the parlor, where an argument ensues. Alice’s
mother exits, leaving Alice and Arthur as the last “pretenders” in
the dining room. Stevens used food to introduce humor into the
scene—Mr. Adams’ attempts to eat and enjoy the food and the
efforts of the maid to serve the food. The humor contrasts with
Alice’s rising sense of disaster and humiliation about the meal and
the evening and serves to create an intense arc of feeling as well
as entertainment for the scene. Stevens paced the scene to follow
that arc.
    In “The More the Merrier,” Stevens played the morning scene
more for humor than tragedy. The 10-minute scene follows the
efforts of Benjamin Dingle to meet the morning scheduling
expectations of his landlady, Connie Mulligan. In 30 minutes, each
must get ready for work, including washing, dressing, and eating.
Dingle is a total failure in his effort to meet the schedule, and this
is the source of humor in the sequence. Connie is the set-up (Oliver
Hardy) to Dingle’s Stan Laurel.


    George Stevens: The American Character—Desire and Conscience
