and his inflatable yellow raft out to water’s edge, and the boy paddles
           out toward the horizon. The first warning of danger is the teenager
           looking for his dog and a cutaway to the driftwood floating. No more
           dog. As Brody is being given a shoulder rub by his wife, the young boy
           on the raft is attacked by the shark. A bloody geyser rises from the
           ocean. What Brody has feared has happened. He rushes to the edge
           of the ocean to help get the panicked swimmers out. When everyone
           is out the mother is still looking desperately for her son, but all that
           is left is the shredded bloody yellow raft. The sequence has been
           focused and clear. The signposts were there and the worst has
           happened.
256            This sequence proceeded with a minimum of dialogue. The next
           sequence, which keeps the story moving, also proceeds without the
           benefit of dialogue. Since “Duel” it has been clear that Spielberg
           loves pure action. The opening of “E.T.” is presented as pure action,
           and it proceeds very quickly. From a narrative point of view, there
           are three important elements of this scene—a curious E.T. has
           strayed from the spaceship, the human pursuers are looking for vis-
           itors from outer space, and the spaceship leaves E.T. behind
           because they must elude their human pursuers. The key to this
           sequence is movement—the camera moves, E.T. moves, the
           human pursuers and their vehicles move, the flashlights move.
           Throughout the scene, the emphasis is on movement. The few still
           shots (the rabbit reacting to E.T., E.T.’s removal of a plant, the
           mushroom-like pods in the spaceship) are unusual in the sequence.
           Screen direction keeps clear who is chasing whom and creates the
           sense of conflict in the scene.
               Identification with the main character is critical. In the “Jaws”
           sequence, it is Brody’s point of view. In much of “Saving Private
           Ryan,” it is either Captain Miller’s point of view or the point of view
           of the German machine gunners. In the “Raiders of the Lost Ark”
           sequence, it is Indiana Jones’ point of view or the guard or driver of
           the truck. Point of view allows us to identify with Indiana Jones or
           Captain Miller or Police Chief Brody.
               Spielberg understands the importance of details to advance the
           plot or characterize. The shot of the piece of driftwood tells us in
           “Jaws” that the dog has become a victim of the shark. The shark is
           out there. The punctured yellow raft tells us about the fate of its
           young occupant. Lifting the plant from the ground tells us E.T. is a


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
