merits a close-up; his wounded body does not. Valerie’s response to
           men, her anger, is worthy of a head-on mid shot, as is her promis-
           cuous desire for a female instructor in college. The shooting of
           Andy Warhol, however, is not worthy of moving in this close.
           Similarly, in “American Psycho,” we only move into a close-up of
           Patrick Bateman when he applies gels and masks to his face. When
           we later see Patrick with his fiancée in a car, the camera shot is a
           mid shot. We are not even introduced to Patrick in the earliest shots
           of the film. The focus is on the food in the restaurant.
               Harron also seems to take an almost musical approach to these
           introductions. Details are punctuated by other details. A tone is
314        created, a very impressionistic one, but a character is not intro-
           duced. The result is that events supersede the character. Inanimate
           objects such as food supersede character, and the environment also
           supersedes character.
               In terms of the editing, Harron prefers short, quick scenes, cut-
           ting slowly. She prefers movement rather than rapid cutting. The
           result is a kind of character inertia rather than a dynamic charac-
           ter in action. Looking at the narrative content of “I Shot Andy
           Warhol,” it is strange as the film opens with the shooting having
           just taken place. The mid and long shots of Valerie further dis-
           tance us from what has just happened. In “American Psycho,”
           Harron chose to open with the food and eating close-ups and
           eventually moved out to mid and long shots of the characters. She
           gradually moved in on Patrick Bateman, opting for moving the
           camera rather than fast cutting. She closed the film in the same
           shot pattern.
               Above all what has fleshed out her camera choices is the need to
           conform to the genre—the docudrama in “I Shot Andy Warhol”
           and the fable in “American Psycho.” Camera placement and shot
           choice in “I Shot Andy Warhol” have a captured as opposed to com-
           posed look. On the other hand, the images in “American Psycho”
           are utterly composed, even stylized, a look suitable for this stylized
           fable of the 1980s.
               Celebrity and banality, desire and the emptiness of those who
           seek it—these comprise the director’s idea deployed by Mary Harron
           in “I Shot Andy Warhol” and “American Psycho.” The challenge
           Harron faced was to make us care about Valerie Solanas and the
           1960s in New York and Patrick Bateman and the New York of the


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
