Introduction

Ernst Lubitsch began his career in Germany during the silent era. In
Germany, he was known for his historical epics. When he was invited
to Hollywood in 1924 by Charlie Chaplin, he established himself
there in the sound period as the leading director of romantic comedy.
For Lubitsch, romance was complex, and he explored all its layers—
idealism, desire, sexuality, pleasure, love. He did not avoid dealing
with jealousy and its by-product, rage. In films such as “To Be or Not
To Be” (1942), “Ninotchka” (1939), “The Shop Around the Corner”
(1940), “Angel” (1937), “Design for Living” (1933), and “Trouble in
Paradise” (1932), Lubitsch celebrated the life force of romance—his          175
director’s idea. In his work, he felt that all the layers of romance were
energetic, creative, and affirming. Although Lubitsch’s films were
well plotted as well as character driven, he never lost sight of his focus
on the personal over the political, pleasure over pain, romance over
cynicism. Lubitsch worked with a number of collaborators, including
Billy Wilder and Samuel Raphaelson, as writers, but his work was so
singular that critics referred to the “Lubitsch touch” when reviewing
his films. More on this shortly.
   Because Lubitsch was so focused on the romantic comedy, we
will look at four of his romantic comedies and how Lubitsch used
plot to open up different avenues within the genre. We will focus on
“Trouble in Paradise” (1932), “Ninotchka” (1939), “The Shop
Around the Corner” (1940), and “To Be or Not To Be” (1942).
Because imitation is one form of flattery, I should mention that
three of these four have been remade—“Ninotchka” as the musical
“Silk Stockings” (1954), “To Be or Not To Be” as Mel Brooks’ 1982
remake of the same name, and “The Shop Around the Corner” as
Nora Ephron’s “You’ve Got Mail” (1999).
   Generally, the romantic comedy follows the course of an
unlikely relationship. The comedy arises out of the attraction of
two opposites and how who conquers whom in the relationship
plays out. A film such as George Stevens’ “Woman of the Year”
with Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn is a model for the
genre. What makes Lubitsch’s work in the genre so unique is that
not only was he interested in the chase but he was also interested
in the complications that become barriers or opportunities in the
chase.

                              Ernst Lubitsch: The Life Force of Romance
