and Dr. Grant (Sam Neill) in “Jurassic Park.” Each is earnest, even
           naïve, and none is a natural hero. (For a fuller discussion of this
           issue, see Chapter 5 in Dancyger and Rush’s Alternative
           Scriptwriting, 3rd ed., Focal Press, 2002.) But when challenged by
           the plot and powerful antagonists, these characters act heroically.
           Spielberg also has a preference for genres that support his style of
           storytelling—specifically, action adventures, thrillers, and war films.
               In terms of the filmmaking itself, few filmmakers pursue identi-
           fication and the excitement of the medium as vigorously, but cam-
           era placement, camera movement, and pace have been used just as
           effectively by Alfred Hitchcock, Roman Polanski, and Luc Besson.
248        Spielberg, like Hitchcock, is playful with the medium, unlike
           Orson Welles or Stanley Kubrick. That playfulness reinforces his
           director’s idea and reflects the childlike joy and intensity present
           throughout much of Spielberg’s work. From the outset of his career,
           he has pushed to challenge certain ideas about filmmaking. When
           he asked himself what he could do with the concept of a chase, his
           answer was “Duel” (1971), an entire film about a truck chasing the
           main character in his car.
               Similar challenges mark many of the celebrated sequences in
           Spielberg’s work—the D-Day landing sequence in “Saving Private
           Ryan,” the clearing of the ghetto in “Schindler’s List,” and the open-
           ings of “Raiders of the Lost Ark,” “Indiana Jones and the Temple of
           Doom” (1984), and “Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade” (1989). In
           each of the “Indiana Jones” films, Spielberg posed a different chal-
           lenge for his hero to overcome. What is important here is that the
           identification and the excitement in the narrative merge with
           Spielberg’s joy in filmmaking to yield a special experience for his
           audience. The most obvious result of this narrative and filmmaking
           confluence is that Spielberg is the single most successful commer-
           cial filmmaker in film history.
               At this point, Spielberg’s film career exceeds 30 years, beginning
           with “Duel” in 1971. Important markers include “Jaws” in 1975, the
           “Indiana Jones” series, 1981–1989, “E.T.” in 1982, “Schindler’s List”
           in 1992, “Jurassic Park” in 1994, “Saving Private Ryan” in 1998, and
           “Artificial Intelligence: AI” in 2001. Spielberg remains active as a
           director and as a producer. In order to capture the spirited approach
           Spielberg has taken to his director’s idea, I have chosen the follow-
           ing four excerpts because they exemplify the director’s idea, and


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
