Directing the Actor

           In casting his films, Moodysson casts for a look that will support the
           director’s idea. For the adolescent roles in “Fucking Åmål” and
           “Lilja 4-Ever” the look has to elicit empathy, which means it must
           be appealing, expressive, and energetic. It also must be a natural
           look. In “Together,” the children Eva and Stefan must look like
           obvious outsiders, and the adults (who so often act like adolescents)
           who belong to the commune must look like earnest, intense young
           adults committed to the communal idea. Only Elisabeth and Rolf
           look like real adults. To convey the contempt in “Lilja 4-Ever” and
284        “A Hole in My Heart,” the adults must look like they have no heart.
               Beyond the look of the adolescents, children, and adults in
           Moodysson’s films, the actors (similar to Kazan’s sense of perfor-
           mance) have to key off of a single characteristic and then explore it in
           every way in their performances. Geko has to explore every aspect
           of his aggression, including the murderous dimension of his rage, in
           “A Hole in My Heart.” Rickard has to explore every nook and cranny
           of his self-pity. In the case of Lilja in “Lilja 4-Ever,” the young actress
           Oksana must hold onto every last morsel of her dignity, whatever the
           circumstances she finds herself in, and dignity must clearly be what
           her character values most. In “Together,” Rolf must explore every
           dimension of his addiction to alcohol and its consequences. The
           courage and the humiliation provided by the alcohol have to be fully
           a presence in his performance. Moodysson’s performers have to, in
           effect, risk it all because that is what their characters do.
               The best way to capture Moodysson’s approach to directing actors
           is to view his performance goals as being akin to those of Peter Brook,
           who is experimental in his efforts to achieve performances that go for
           a spiritual as well as a material presence. Although the word existential
           comes to mind, its implication is too academic for the Moodysson per-
           formances. They are raw and go far in generating a feeling equivalent
           to that of Brook’s work, an edgy mix of the material and the spiritual.
               Finally, there is a declarative dimension to the performances.
           Whether this is about a state (“I am so bored”) or whether it is about a
           goal (“I love Elin”) that obsesses the character, the outcome is the
           same. The performances gain an urgency that energizes the need of the
           character to find a solution. Lena tells Göran that she wants to sleep
           with Eric because he’s so troubled. Afterward, she also tells Göran that


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
