The great director not only adds value to the experience of the
film but also provides a transformative experience. By transforma-
tive I refer to what all great art does: It gives us another way of seeing
the ordinary. A man uses his bike for work. The bike is stolen. The
economic future of his family is in jeopardy. The man steals a bike,
and his son watches as he is caught. The boy shares his humiliation.
Vittoria De Sica transforms an everyday story of survival into a story
about poverty and fathers and sons. The shared humiliation of
father and son will no doubt have an effect on the child. How will
this boy grow up—a thief or a doctor? Will he be a caring or callous
person? Such questions emanate from the directing of “The Bicycle
Thief,” in which De Sica transformed a simple story into something           15
quite special about all of us. This is what the great director does.
And the instrument is the director’s idea. Because individual chap-
ters are devoted to each of these categories, we will move on to a
discussion of how a director’s idea unifies a production.


The Unity of the Production

It is critical for the viewer that the film be experienced whole. By
that I mean that the text interpretation, the performances of the
actors, and the shot selection act together to build the viewer’s expe-
rience. Imagine a jokey, superficial performance in a film such as
Ordinary People, where the realism and emotional credibility of the
characters are key to the experience of the film. Unity means the
tools of directing are working together, and this is the purpose of a
clear and strong director’s idea, which promotes a unity of experi-
ence for the audience. A few examples will illustrate how. I have
intentionally chosen two relatively simple narratives so it will be
clear how the director’s idea is operating.
    The first example is Volker Schlondorff’s “The Ninth Day” (2005).
The story takes place over the course of nine days in 1942. A Catholic
priest is held in Dachau, where he and his fellow priests are poorly
treated but not as poorly as the rest of Dachau’s inmates. He is given
a leave of nine days to convince his bishop in Luxembourg to accept
the primacy of Nazi rule. We learn that the priest is respected, schol-
arly, and pious and comes from an important family in Luxembourg.
For eight days he visits with his family and the bishop’s secretary. He


                                                         The Director’s Idea
