with text interpretation created romantic subtexts that lifted
       Wilder’s director’s ideas to remarkable heights.
           Not all directors use the same mix of tools to elevate their work.
       The directors we have discussed thus far used a mix of text interpre-
       tation and performance to power their work. The next group of
       directors uses a different mix, that of performance and the camera.
       In the case of George Stevens and Steven Spielberg, they have
       deployed camera and performance to highlight the humanity in the
       characters portrayed in their films. Both Stevens and Spielberg have
       had as their goal that the audience will recognize themselves in
       their characters. This attentiveness to character can seem manipu-
324    lative but in their work the focus is on first a recognition of the
       humanity of the character and eventually an invitation to see our-
       selves in that character. There is no other way to understand the
       power and poignancy of the character of George Eastman in
       “A Place in the Sun” or of John Miller in “Saving Private Ryan.” For
       Stevens, humanity required an emotional complexity. When
       Angela Vickers meets George Eastman in “A Place in the Sun,” he
       is playing pool alone. We understand why he is alone. He has tried
       to mingle with the guests at the Eastman party but even his cousin
       has failed to acknowledge his presence. When Angela sees him she
       is impressed by his acumen at pool. She asks him why he is alone.
       Is he feeling blue, or is he simply antisocial? In a sense, he is both.
       He has been rejected by his peers, so, alone, he is both blue and
       antisocial. This acknowledgment by Angela immediately penetrates
       his mask, and his wanting to be alone turns into anxiety, and this
       feeling, too, is acknowledged. In this brief exchange of the soon-to-
       be lovers, George Eastman has been acknowledged and portrayed
       as emotionally complex and very human. Later, when his desire
       clouds his judgment and he considers killing his working-class
       lover, Alice, it is his humanity, and hers, that prevents him from car-
       rying out the murder. At this point we can see ourselves in George
       Eastman—basically decent but conflicted about desire and our feel-
       ing guilty for having that desire.
           To characterize the humanity of George Eastman, Stevens relied
       principally on performance and his direction of the camera. The
       performances of Montgomery Clift as George Eastman, of
       Elizabeth Taylor as Angela, and Shelly Winters as Alice can be cat-
       egorized as either masked or emotionally open. Both Angela and


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
