change. Although there is a political patina here, Becker has chosen
          to focus on the personal, psychological son–mother story. To make
          the political layer more prominent, a greater east–west perspective
          could be added, such as in Billy Wilder’s “One Two Three” and
          Margarethe Von Trotta’s “The Promise.” To add more of a commu-
          nity or sociological perspective, a wider character population could
          be explored by factoring in elements of age, gender, and class. In
          “Goodbye Lenin,” Becker comically blends all the characters into a
          similar level of adjustment after the fall of the Wall. This overall
          acceptance of change could be replaced by a broader scope of reac-
          tions to the changes going on in the community.
84            The political, sociological, and psychological perspectives are
          powerful interpretive filters, and each yields a different experience
          of the narrative.


          Tone

          Although tone tends to be genre specific, it is possible to reinterpret
          the tone for a particular purpose. What I mean by this is that
          Eugene O’Neill’s work may be classic tragic melodrama, but that
          has not prevented particular directors from expanding the humor in
          Act I to give the tragedy of the last act more impact. Writers and
          directors can and do use humor and irony to shift or intensify our
          experience. A useful example here is the work of the Coen brothers.
          In most cases, the Coens use a straightforward genre approach with
          the expected tone. “Miller’s Crossing” is as emotionally realistic as
          we can expect a gangster film to be. “The Man Who Wasn’t There”
          is as expressionistic and stylized as we expect film noir to be. “Fargo”
          and “Raising Arizona,” on the other hand, present interesting exam-
          ples where humor and irony alter the genre expectation. In “Raising
          Arizona,” a serial convict falls in love with a policewoman. All they
          need is a child. Failing natural means, they decide to kidnap a baby,
          and they do so from a business tycoon who has quintuplets. The
          romance, the theft, and the efforts of the tycoon to retake the baby
          are often cartoonish, more action–adventure than crime story. The
          consequences of the absurdist humor make the commoditization of
          the child all the more horrifying. The result is an unsettling experi-
          ence as opposed to a realistic experience.


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
