Alice are emotionally open and expressive, which requires above all
an honesty in the presentation of these characters. The actresses
portraying these characters are admirable in their projection of the
transparency of their characters. Montgomery Clift, on the other
hand, is more masked; he feigns directness but all the while masks
his feeling. When Angela unmasks him in their first meeting, we get
a glimpse of his vulnerability. For Clift, this required a more inter-
nal performance and he, too, performed admirably.
   In terms of camera choices, Stevens relied on two styles of shots
to depict the humanity of his characters. The close-ups of George
and Angela in the scene where they meet captures the openness of
Angela and the mask of George. Later close-ups of George in the              325
boat with Alice are not able to illustrate his murderous intent. The
lighting produced shadows on his face, particularly his eyes, which
masked his intent from Alice but suggested his intent to the audi-
ence. The other shot Stevens relied on was a slow tracking shot. As
Angela and George begin to dance in the scene that follows their
meeting in the pool room, the camera discovers them and moves in
on their growing intimacy. The slow tracking shot creates an antici-
pation of their growing desire and the culmination of their desire to
be together.
   In the case of John Miller, Spielberg introduced him in “Saving
Private Ryan” as a capable officer who is serious about his job. Like
the police chief in “Jaws,” Miller is decent and effective in his work.
In both “Saving Private Ryan” and “Jaws,” the plot challenges the
character. For Miller, the plot is to find Private Ryan behind enemy
lines. This means putting his men in harm’s way. Is it worth it? This
will be Miller’s struggle. In the case of “Jaws,” the police chief
unequivocally stands for shutting the beaches and eliminating the
human food supply for the shark. In both cases, the humanity of the
main character is highlighted and challenged by the plot.
   In terms of performance, the key was to convey an idea of the
characters being caring and effective. Both Tom Hanks and Roy
Scheider worked within these parameters. Spielberg also gave each
main character a private moment—the police chief with his wife,
Miller with platoon members who are trying to find out about his
private life—where the vulnerability of each character is clearly on
display. As in the case of Stevens, Spielberg allows secondary char-
acters to be expressive while the private side of them remains more


                                                                Conclusion
