The subtext of the “Road to Perdition,” directed by Sam Mendes,
      is paternal love. The subtext of “Zorba the Greek,” directed by
      Michael Cacoyannis, is eros, or life force. In each of these films,
      the directors used the subtext as their director’s ideas to deepen the
      classic gangster film and classic melodrama. For the director, the
      subtext can be the most overt path to his director’s idea.
          A coherent character arc can also be a useful vehicle for the
      director’s idea, but for the arc to be genuinely animated by the direc-
      tor’s idea it must be surprising. All screen stories, at least those that
      are character driven, are essentially stories of character transforma-
      tion. Stories of adjustment, coming of age, or loss of innocence are
22    not in and of themselves surprising. What make them surprising is
      the use of deeper themes as both the director’s idea and the instru-
      ment of transformation. Two examples will illustrate how this works.
      William Wyler’s “The Heiress” is an adaptation of the Henry James
      novel Washington Square. In a nutshell, the character arc intro-
      duces a main character who is plain but wealthy. Two relationships
      are key: a father who is judgmental and treats his daughter harshly
      and a suitor who is handsome and a fortune seeker. In the begin-
      ning, the main character is hungry for acceptance but at the end she
      rejects her suitor because her father was right. She is initially hope-
      ful and young but ends up more mature, realistic, and embittered.
      The character arc can be viewed as a loss of innocence. The direc-
      tor’s idea here is to show how disappointment plays a major role in
      the lives of all the characters and how those disappointments drive
      the outcome of the character arc. The father is disappointed that
      when his wife dies in childbirth he is left with his daughter; the
      daughter is disappointed by the absence of her father’s love and is
      disappointed that her father was right about her suitor.
          A second example is George Miller’s “Lorenzo’s Oil.” A married
      couple has a child late in life. For the husband, it is his second fam-
      ily, as he has two grown children from the first marriage. The incit-
      ing incident of the film is the onset of an incurable disease in the
      child, who is five years old. The main character is the wife, who had
      the child when she was forty years old. The character arc is discov-
      ering motherhood relatively late in life and marveling at the state of
      motherhood. The onset of the child’s disease threatens to rob this
      mother of her newly discovered state of motherhood. The character
      arc ends with the boy alive but essentially crippled by the disease.


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
