“Saving Private Ryan” (1998)
The final excerpt is from “Saving Private Ryan.” Although the film
begins with the grandfatherly Private Ryan visiting the Normandy
Beach gravesite with his children and grandchildren, the bulk of the
film takes place on June 6, 1944, and the few days following. The
main character is Captain John Miller (Tom Hanks). The D-Day
landing on the beach is the sequence we will focus on. Following this
sequence, Captain Miller will be given the assignment to find Private
Ryan, whose three brothers have died on the beach. General George
Marshall has ordered Private Ryan be returned to his family as he is
their only living son. The trouble is, he has parachuted behind enemy
lines. To find him will jeopardize the members of Captain Miller’s          251
platoon. Is it worth it? This is the struggle for the main character, and
in the end he will choose to sacrifice his life to save Private Ryan. The
D-Day sequence is 24 minutes long and its intent is to put us, the
viewer, on the beach and feel the danger, violence, and death expe-
rienced by so many American soldiers. (A detailed discussion of the
editing of this sequence appears in my book, The Technique of Film
and Video Editing, 3rd ed., Focal Press, 2002, pp. 197–201.) Using
cinéma vérité techniques, hand-held moving cameras, many close-
ups, and a shifting point of view from the American soldiers to the
German machine gunners and back, Spielberg takes us to Normandy
Beach on that fateful day. The sequence progresses as follows:

   1. In the landing craft
   2. In the water
   3. At the edge of the beach (what do we do?)
   4. Movement off the beach
   5. Up the perimeter, marked with barbed wire
   6. Gather weapons
   7. Advance on the pill box and take the machine gun placement
   8. Take the pill box and the surrounding environment
   9. The beach is taken; stop shooting

What is important to Spielberg in this sequence is to give us the
sense of being there, including the chaos, without confusing us.
The sequence is impressive in its clarity and its characterization of
the chaos of killing. The sequence illustrates the virtuosity of
Spielberg’s filmmaking skills.

                                    Steven Spielberg: Childhood Forever
