make their way toward a ship. The police are everywhere. Blackie
assaults Dr. Reed and kills Raymond. He finds the ship but cannot
climb all the way up and falls into the water, where he is picked up
by the police.

“On the Waterfront” (1954)
The hiring scene in “On the Waterfront” is also filmed documen-
tary style and brings together various narrative strands. Earlier, Terry
Malloy has betrayed a friend, Joey Doyle. Prompted by his brother
Charlie, Terry tells Joey that he found one of his pigeons. Joey reluc-
tantly agrees to meet Terry on the roof, where gangsters are waiting
for him. They push him off the roof and he falls to his death. Terry         195
feels bad but is rewarded by the head of the union, Johnny Friendly.
Joey’s family, particularly his father, feel that he would be alive if
he was deaf and dumb and unwilling to report the corruption he has
discovered. Joey’s sister, Edie (Eva Marie Saint), is outraged. Her
brother was the nicest kid on the block, and she wants justice. The
priest (Karl Malden) tries to comfort her but she accuses him
and his religion of making empty promises. He feels impotent in the
situation.
    The purpose of the hiring scene is ostensibly to illustrate the
corruption of union hiring practices. The men line up awaiting
the call for the union steward. Favors and bribes yield work assign-
ments. Terry is the first one assigned a reward for helping the union
with its problem, Joey Doyle. Mr. Doyle passes Joey’s jacket (the
mantle) to Dugan, a loose-lipped longshoreman who will become
the next one courageous enough to go up against the mob’s union
control. Two investigators approach Terry to talk to them. Terry
aggressively rejects the invitation; he won’t be a pigeon, d and d
(deaf and dumb). When the shop steward throws the job tickets for
the day to the ground, a stampede for the right to work ensues.
Terry meets Edie when they fight for the same ticket. When he
finds out who she is he gives her the ticket. The priest is also
present; this is his parish, and he declares that he will take a more
active role. This scene presents the corruption and brings together
Terry, Edie, Doyle, Dugan, and the priest, setting up the narrative
events and relationships to follow. Kazan uses a documentary
style to emphasize the realism of corruption and the characters
involved.


                                                 Elia Kazan: Drama as Life
