Directing the Actor

       Mary Harron set herself quite a challenge in the characters of
       “I Shot Andy Warhol” and “American Psycho.” The task was to
       make these eccentric, unappealing characters sufficiently energetic
       and engaging to keep us engaged in the movies. Here casting
       helped. In both films, Harron cast very good young character actors.
       In “I Shot Andy Warhol,” she casts Lili Taylor as Valerie Solanas and
       Jared Harris as Andy Warhol and proceeded to surround them with
       the crime crème de la crème of New York actors: Martha Plimpton,
       Steven Dorff, Lothaire Bluteau, and Jill Hennessy. All are charis-
312    matic character actors. She cast “American Psycho” in a similar way
       by surrounding Christian Bale with Reese Witherspoon, Samantha
       Matthis, Chloé Sevigny, Jared Leto, Josh Lucas, and Willem Dafoe.
       Again, individual charisma was key. The casting was for look, range,
       and energy and always for individualistic presence.
           Working with her cast, Harron set the bar high. Both Solanas
       and Bateman had to appear as eccentric, strange, inaccessible peo-
       ple who operate just below the radar. This quality gives each char-
       acter a remote, alienated quality. From this base, Harron
       encouraged energy. Solanas is always moving. She spits out bullets
       for words. Whether she is aggressive or anxious, movement gives her
       performance physicality, yet Solanas speaks with a flatness of affect
       that contradicts the words themselves, signaling her internal strug-
       gle. The lack of affect also implies Valerie’s disconnect from the
       world around her.
           Playing Patrick Bateman, Christian Bale had to move between
       his character’s self-absorption and his aggression. Bateman watches
       himself in a mirror as he’s making love to a woman. His body rather
       than hers is his love object. Vanity, watching people watch him, cre-
       ates the internal values of this character. He couldn’t care less about
       anybody else, and this goes to the nub of the character’s problem.
       He is contemptuous of others.
           Harron juxtaposes these main characters with the theatricality
       that surrounds them. In “I Shot Andy Warhol,” Candy Darling and
       the acolytes around Andy Warhol are each over the top in their false-
       ness; they are poseurs hoping that hanging around Andy Warhol will
       elevate them to a celebrity that will distinguish them from the crowd.
       In “American Psycho,” Bateman’s peers are each over the top in their


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
