very important. For others, such as Anthony Minghella or Steven
      Soderbergh, plot is far less important. If plot is critical, character
      flattens. If character is critical, psychology is central, and the plot
      becomes secondary.
          The director also needs to clearly bring into the foreground his
      own values. What are his obsessions in life? The director’s idea
      allows the director to highlight and articulate the values in the story
      that are important to him. All of us in a fashion are curious about
      the corners of ourselves. A director who wants to gain the audience’s
      love will be charming and maybe funny as they tell the story.
      Another director might want the audience to be impressed and will
20    seek the most complicated, challenging approach to telling the
      story. Yet another director will be attracted by the challenge of the
      project itself. The more challenging the project is, the more the
      director becomes vested in it. Directors of comedies want to earn
      the love of their audiences (think of a film such as “Meet the
      Fokkers”). Directors such as Steven Spielberg (“Schindler’s List”)
      want to earn both the audience’s love and respect. In “2001: A Space
      Odyssey,” Stanley Kubrick took up the challenge of dealing with
      human history and such philosophical issues as being and of man
      versus technology. For Kubrick, the challenge was his goal of creat-
      ing a visual meditation on man and technology. These goals are
      important filters as directors create their director’s ideas.
          What I am suggesting is that the director must have a conscious
      personal and creative set of goals when choosing to commit to a
      story. I am also saying that such a commitment will require articu-
      lating how the director feels and wants us to feel about the main
      character.
          The director begins developing a director’s idea by interpreting
      the text. What is the basic concept or premise of the story? It is best
      to think of the premise in light of two opposing choices facing a
      main character. Love or money is the choice facing the main char-
      acter in “Titanic.” To be like the father, an immigrant, or to be
      different from the father is the premise in “Four Friends.” To be an
      ambulance chaser for the rest of his life or to restore his dignity are
      the two choices for the main character in “The Verdict.”
          The premise is the key to both the film and to our relationship
      with the main character. Understanding the premise and being
      excited about exploring that premise lead to articulation of the


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
