This appendix is intended to offer you practical guidelines for finding
the director’s idea for your project. We begin with a deep reading of
the script.


Strategy for Reading the Script

Three crucial questions should emerge from the first reading:

   1. What is the genre or story form? Each story form has a different
      dramatic shape and presentation of character and deployment
      of plot.                                                              331
   2. Who is the main character and his or her goal? There should
      be a distinct main character with a clear goal.
   3. What is the character arc, or, to put it another way, how will the
      experience of the story change the main character? You should
      be able to identify the state of the character at the beginning of
      the story and how the character changes as the story unfolds.

   Upon a second reading, another set of questions should be
answered:

   1. What is the premise of the story? The premise—sometimes
      called the spine, central conflict, or engine—of the story is best
      understood as the two opposing choices facing the main char-
      acter. Often these two choices concern important relationships
      presented in the narrative.
   2. Is the premise consistent with the main character and his goal?
      It should be. If, for example, the main character in the “The
      Verdict” is a successful lawyer, then the premise of restoring
      dignity to a dissipated life would not resonate. There must be
      a link between the premise and the main character.
   3. Does the main character transform in such a way that his or
      her transformation is credible, meaningful, and emotionally
      satisfying?
   4. What is the plot in the film, and how is the plot used? Ideally,
      plot works most effectively when it puts into place forces pitted
      against the main character’s goal. In “A Very Long
      Engagement,” a young woman cannot believe her fiancé has


                                    Appendix: Finding the Director’s Idea
