keeps stopping for alcohol and becomes quite drunk. Road blocks set
          up to catch an escaped convict do not encourage caution, just more
          bravado. When a tire bursts, the stranger pulls the car over and takes
          over. He changes the tire but then drives into the woods. When the
          stranger becomes more threatening, the main character smashes
          him with a liquor bottle, batters him, and runs him over with the car.
          Lost and again sober, the main character has the car towed to the
          local town for repair. There he learns that his wife never made it to
          Bordeaux. He finds out that she was raped and shot on the train by
          the previously mentioned escaped convict. Eventually, we learn that
          the stranger he killed was the convict. The film ends with husband
18        and wife reconciled and continuing on to pick up their children.
              Kahn’s director’s idea is that violence resides everywhere in the
          world and arises from expected sources (the escaped convict) and
          from the most unexpected (the normally rather timid main charac-
          ter). Violence complicates everything—relationships, vacations, and
          more. The director’s idea regarding violence begins to take shape
          with the text interpretation. The main character is Antoine. His fre-
          quent calls to his wife are punctuated by glasses of beer. The alcohol
          illustrates his frustration; alcohol and coping will be further linked as
          we move through the film. His wife, Helene, is clearly a strong
          person. Her lack of tolerance for the drinking, together with its impli-
          cations for his driving, illustrates her unwillingness to be victimized
          by her husband’s behavior (his drinking as well as the way he is driv-
          ing). Antoine’s driving becomes increasingly violent as his risk-taking
          on the road becomes increasingly dangerous. The upshot of his driv-
          ing will be two consecutive incidents of flat tires (separate scenes)—
          consider them as foreshadows of the consequences of the violence of
          his behavior on the road. Finally, we have the stranger, who is in fact
          a violent escaped convict. His silence and his actions imply bottled
          up, explosive violence. Physically, he is the opposite of Antoine,
          which also makes him a threat.
              All of the actions—telephone calls, drinking, driving, talking to
          doctors and nurses—seem to be filled with the potential to be
          unpredictable and terrifying. Kahn regards all the actions and
          behaviors in the narrative as actions and behaviors that have violent
          potential, no matter how benign they might inherently be. Kahn’s
          goal in the interpretation of the text is to convey violence and its
          revelation in all things.


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
