worlds, not caring if they are transgressing adult rules of conduct. As
       Truffaut’s children grows into adults, their view of the world does
       not change. His characters remain occupants of their own worlds—
       functional and dysfunctional. This view is carried forward by
       Antoine in “Stolen Kisses” and “Love on the Run.” It is also the pre-
       vailing view of the males in “Day for Night.”
           Women in all of these films present differently. Christine in
       “Stolen Kisses” and “Love on the Run” and Sabine and Colette in
       “Love on the Run” are all far more knowing and more honest than
       Antoine and Xavier. The men are grown-up boys, guarded, secre-
       tive, and disingenuous about the issue of commitment. The women
210    seek stable relationships, and the men elude stable relationships.
           The men seem equally unsettled in their work life. Antoine,
       having published a novel, works in a print shop. Xavier owns a
       bookstore. The actors and the director in “Day for Night” also have
       chosen a creative field, but both Alphonse and the director have
       fears and anxieties that threaten to undermine their commitment
       to their work.
           In terms of the text interpretation, it is critical that the view of
       men and women underscore a particular perception of each.
       Truffaut’s focus on the progress of relationships, or lack of, high-
       lights the respective roles within a relationship. The view that men
       are really self-absorbed and rather deceptive boys is consistent
       throughout the four films excerpted here.
           In terms of these boy-men, their spirited resistance to embracing
       adult responsibility is part of their charm. A second strategy of
       Truffaut’s was to reveal their discomfort with honest communica-
       tion. In “Stolen Kisses” and “Love on the Run,” Antoine is con-
       stantly calling Christine and Sabine to make excuses for
       disappointing them. He forgets commitments made, he dissociates
       himself from accepting responsibility for what he has decided to do
       (perceived as negative by his girlfriend) and often will become
       defensive, but he always calls. In other words, Antoine is always try-
       ing to do the right thing but falls short. A third strategy Truffaut used
       to engage us with his boy-men was to draw attention to their artistic
       aspirations. These characters are too nonconformist to fit into the
       commercial world; maybe they can fit into the creative world where
       imagination (including lying) is viewed with greater tolerance.
       Truffaut also shifted genres to make his frustrating characters more


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
