she has had her first ever orgasm. All the ones she had with Göran
were fake. Of course, her admission could be viewed as her character
opening up, which might be true on the surface. In the performance,
however, we also need to see her self-serving promiscuous urges. This
is a girl who just wants to have fun. Think of it as the declaration and
the revelation. Moodysson seeks both in the performance.


Directing the Camera

An examination of Moodysson’s camera and editing choices should
begin with what he omits. Moodysson does not open convention-              285
ally. He opens without the benefit of establishing shots. To put it
another way, he throws us into the middle of his story at the outset.
The purpose of the establishing shot, whether it is an extremely
long shot or a long shot, is to locate the action and its time and
place; it is an establishing shot that provides context for the story to
follow. Moodysson provides us neither context nor narrative link to
consider where he is taking us.
    In “Fucking Åmål,” we are immediately introduced to Agnes and
Elin. In “Together,” we are introduced to Göran and Lena and the
commune as the death of Franco is announced and the commune
members celebrate by chanting, “Franco is dead.” “Lilja 4-Ever”
opens with Lilja running down a Swedish street toward the bridge she
will use to commit suicide, “Meine Herz Brent” pulsing to the strings
of a hard rock beat. “A Hole in My Heart” opens in the morning as
Rickard awakens and Eric contemplates whether he will make it
through another day. In each of the films, we simply move right into
the characters. All are caught at a critical moment in their lives. For
Agnes, it is her 16th birthday. For Lilja, it is the last moment before
she ends her life. Moving right to the characters, Moodysson is telling
us what is important in his stories—the characters, not the context.
    To bring us closer to the characters, Moodysson favors the close-
up. Rather than mid shots and long shots, he generally opts for the
close-up. The films are not exclusively shot in close-up, as Carl
Dreyer does in “The Passion of Joan of Arc,” but close-ups are used
enough to push us closer to the characters. No context means we
have only the relationship with the characters as we are introduced
to them and observe them.


                                 Lukas Moodysson: Empathy and Its Limits
