they attend a situation comedy. John Frankenheimer’s “Ronin” rep-
      resents the kind of thriller audiences are looking for when they
      attend a thriller. Francis Ford Coppola has made many great films,
      but he was missing in action when he made the situation comedy
      “Jack” (1995) and when he made the Grisham thriller “The
      Rainmaker” (1997). These represent the loss of acuity of genre that
      alienates an audience.
          Audiences also are looking for a style that lifts up the narrative.
      Steven Spielberg understands this notion very well. His Indiana
      Jones films have a sense of playful fun, a tone that lifts the film expe-
      rience from B movie plotting to a pleasurable sense of fun.
26    Spielberg’s “Empire of the Sun” (1984) creates an eccentric educa-
      tion for a young British boy in a Japanese prisoner of war camp; the
      sense of wonder that permeates the boy’s sensibility sustains him
      through the greatest hardships. Spielberg shifts to a totally opposite
      extreme, a documentary style, in the ghetto clearance sequence in
      “Schindler’s List” and in the D-Day landing that opens “Saving
      Private Ryan.” Because Spielberg had goals for both films, these
      sequences elevate the power of the films. This sense of style is
      important for audiences when they attend a film.
          Audiences want an emotional journey when they attend a
      film. That requires inviting the audience to identify with a main
      character and then articulating that person’s inner struggle. An
      example will illustrate this point. In Patrice Chereau’s “Queen
      Margot” (1996), the princess Margot, a Catholic, is forced by her
      mother, Catherine de Medici, to marry a Protestant, Henry
      Bourbon of Navarre. The time is 1572, and the Protestants and
      Catholics of France are struggling for power. A critical compo-
      nent of the plot is the St. Bartholomew’s massacre—the state-
      sanctioned murder of Protestants by the Catholic rulers. The
      inner journey of Margot, the emotional core of the story, is
      Margot’s love for her Protestant husband. Because of this love,
      she chooses to side with her husband Henry against her mother
      and brothers. By doing so, Margot gives up her safety net and risks
      everything. Her emotional journey brings the audience into her
      struggle and her transformation.
          The same filmmaker made the film “Intimacy” (1999), a film
      about two strangers who meet for weekly sex in today’s London.
      Although the main male character becomes obsessed with his lover,


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
