the relationship. The consequent complexity of the sisters’ rela-
       tionship is the subtext for their performances. It was Von Trotta’s
       ambition for her actresses and her challenge in modulating their
       performances.


       Directing the Camera

       “Rosenstrasse” begins with a montage of New York. “Sisters,” unusu-
       ally beings with a tracking shot into the woods. This abstract image
       will recur throughout the film. The visual metaphor is unusual in
272    Von Trotta’s work. More often she is straightforward with the
       images. Her narrative agenda is so considerable that she needs to
       devote the visuals to carrying us from narrative point to narrative
       point. In this sense, Von Trotta is not flashy visually but rather func-
       tional. She shows us what she needs to show us in order to follow
       the narrative. All else is excluded. Another quality of her visuals is
       that she prefers to focus on the performances rather than the visual
       power of a shot. Substance in her work triumphs over style.
           Her approach to the camera is natural rather than fancy, direct
       rather than subtle. In “Marianne and Juliane,” the scenes that
       characterize the girls growing up focus first and foremost on their
       relationship, their closeness. The past is dominated by one person,
       their father. In those scenes, the focus is on the father’s authoritar-
       ian style versus the girls’ wrath, Juliane’s outrage, and Marianne’s
       conciliatory moves between father and the rebellious Juliane. All
       else, including the mother, is contextual, background. Marianne,
       Juliane, and their father are shown in close-ups, the others primarily
       in long shots.
           Similarly in the classroom scene where the adolescent girls are
       shown concentration camp films, the focus is on the two girls and
       the footage. The teacher and the other students are background or
       simply omitted. A feature, then, of Von Trotta’s style is her focus on
       only the principal characters and letting all else fall away or blend
       into the background context. Associated with this quality is a focus
       on character over plot; when plot is introduced, as in the effort
       to free Fabian in “Rosenstrasse,” it is within the context of one of
       the principal characters—in this case, Fabian’s wife Lena. There are
       shots of Fabian being threatened with death by the Gestapo, but


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
