“Jurassic Park.” Amon Goeth in “Schindler’s List” and the German
soldier in “Saving Private Ryan” represent a departure in Spielberg’s
work. Both are studies in evil and consequently far more dangerous
as antagonists.
   The role of plot is crucial to Spielberg’s work, and not just to
serve as a challenge to the goal of the main character. For most of
the directors we have examined thus far, plot rarely became an
element of its own, taking precedence over character. Think of
John Ford, for example. Plot could be vigorous, but we never for-
get in “The Searchers” that plot is an expression of Ethan’s
revenge. In Polanski’s “Rosemary’s Baby,” the plot is related to
Rosemary’s greatest wish to be a mother. Her worst nightmare             253
would be to see her child as evil but this is precisely what occurs.
In Spielberg’s work, the plot becomes the most powerful narrative
element. It stands above and beyond character. It is the true
source of challenge and allows Spielberg to be playful. How else
are we to understand the vigor of the chase in “Raiders of the Lost
Ark”? Indiana Jones is victorious, but the excitement and joy are
created by the idea of Indiana Jones on horseback overtaking a
truck and coming up with its contents. The same can be said of
the D-Day beach sequence in “Saving Private Ryan.” The twists
and turns in the action on that beach are more important than
the fate or psychology of the main character at that point.
Spielberg’s enjoyment of plot and plotting is evident in each real-
ization of his director’s idea.
   Finally, I should offer a comment on the tone that supports the
director’s idea in Spielberg’s films. Tone is very much about the
visual details that create the mood Spielberg is after. The excerpt
from “E.T.” is useful here. Imagine that a spaceship from outer
space has landed. Menace, malice, and mischief can all be moti-
vations, but the details Spielberg provided indicate none of these
intentions. Instead, the details reflect a sense of curiosity. E.T.’s
curiosity about the lighted valley below and a plant he digs up, his
response to being left behind, the lights that flicker from the
frontal heart region of the extraterrestrial—all of these details sug-
gest a benign, even kind nature. Although the look of the extrater-
restrial is strange, his actions are not. Indeed, they are childlike
and considerate. Humans in this excerpt are portrayed as aggres-
sive and rather mysterious. They pursue. We see their lights, their


                                   Steven Spielberg: Childhood Forever
