experience of the film. It may even transport the audience into a
sense of the 18th century, at least in terms of time.

Movement from Movement
To move the camera physically, thereby capturing movement while
the camera is moving, often requires that a track be built so the
movement is smooth. The mounted camera is then moved along
the track. Such tracks can be quite elaborate, such as the one used
to film an attack on a train in David Lean’s “Lawrence of Arabia.”
Another means of recording movement is to put the camera on
a truck or car. A truck with a hoist will give the camera lateral as
well as vertical mobility. Orson Welles used just such a trucking         93
setup for the famous three-minute shot that opens “Touch of Evil.”
Other devices can be as simple as a car, or even a wheelchair. In
each case, the technical operation of the car or truck or trestle
smooths the camera movement.
    Numerous directors have made the moving shot their signature
shot. Alfred Hitchcock, Fred Murnau, Max Ophuls, Stanley
Kubrick, Luchino Visconti, and Steven Spielberg each has helped
define the aesthetic parameters of the moving shot. There are two
camps in the use of the moving shot: those who use the shot objec-
tively (e.g., as a means to avoid later editing) and those who use
the shot subjectively to enhance identification. One of the
most famous objective camera motion shots is the car accident
sequence in Jean-Luc Godard’s “Weekend.” The camera simply
records the traffic jam caused by the accident and finally after
about five minutes of traffic the camera comes upon the victims.
There are no close-ups here, only the objectively rendered traffic
jam and accident. Objective movement is also often used to give
an overview of a scene. The Omaha Beach D-Day battle scene in
Spielberg’s “Saving Private Ryan” is an example of this type of
movement.
    Subjective motion shots, on the other hand, lend a scene inten-
sity and dramatic tension. Whether the movement simulates the
point of view of Dr. Jekyll in Reuben Mamoulian’s “Dr. Jekyll and
Mr. Hyde” or whether it precedes a running Cary Grant as a biplane
in the background tries to kill him in Alfred Hitchcock’s “North by
Northwest,” the goal of each shot is to put the audience in the
position of the character. Subjective camera movement is perhaps


                                                             The Camera
