Case Study I. The Competent Director:
Antoine Fuqua (“King Arthur,” 2004)
Antoine Fuqua is best known for his 2001 film “Training Day,” fea-
turing Denzel Washington’s Oscar-winning performance. “King
Arthur” (2004) followed the Bruce Willis film, “Tears of the Sun”
(2003). “King Arthur” is in scale and budget Fuqua’s largest film.
The King Arthur legend of early England and the knights of the
Round Table has been a frequently used basis for films. Cornell
Wilde’s “The Sword of Lancelot” (1963) tells the story as Action
Adventure. John Boorman’s “Excalibur” (1981) tells the story as
                                                                         29
fable, and Joshua Logan’s “Camelot” (1967) tells the story as a musi-
cal. Fuqua’s presentation is pure action adventure.
    Fuqua, working with a David Franzoni script, casts Arthur as part
Roman, part Briton. His knights are Eastern cavalry Sarmatians from
the plains adjacent to the Black Sea who are indebted to fight for
Rome for 15 years. All have been sent to the Empire’s most distant
outpost, Britain. An added complication is that Rome is about to quit
Britain. As we join the story, the knights are a day from discharging
their duty to Rome, but there is one last assignment for Arthur and
his knights: rescue an important Roman family north of Hadrian’s
Wall. They need to cross the forest of the Woats, pagan Britons who
have never accepted Roman rule. Also complicating the story is the
fact that the cruel Saxons have invaded Britain from the north. They
pose a real threat as they destroy all and everyone in their path.
    It is 450 A.D., and Rome is controlled by the Pope and the
Church. The Woats and Arthur’s knights are pagan. At the Roman
villa, they find that the priests are torturing and killing the Woats.
Arthur intervenes and saves the two Woats who are still alive, a
young boy and a woman, Guinevere. This represents Arthur’s first
distancing from the authority of Rome, and for Arthur Guinevere
will become the voice of Britain for the Britons. On the journey
back to Hadrian’s Wall, Merlin, the leader of the Woats, invites
Arthur to lead all Britons against the common enemy, the Saxons.
Lancelot, Arthur’s friend and principal knight, urges self-interest—
ride away, leave this place—but Arthur cannot just ride away as
other Romans can. He leads the Britons to defeat the Saxons. A
number of his knights, including Lancelot, die in the battle. Arthur


                                                The Competent Director
