and evil in “Rosemary’s Baby.” Similarly, the beauty of Southern
California masks the primitive venality and greed operating in
“Chinatown.” In “Tess,” the pastoral beauty of the countryside
masks the ugliness of class and the exploitative nature of economic
progress. In “The Pianist,” the beauty and culture of civilized
Warsaw can do nothing to protect its Jewish citizens. Again, the
beauty of the environment masks the barbarity of its inhabitants.
    Another feature of Polanski’s text interpretation is his exclusion
of the extraneous or, put another way, his documentary-like
approach toward the progressive victimization of his main charac-
ter. Detailing this progression requires the inclusion of specific
details as markers. In “The Pianist,” for example, Szpilman’s finding     227
a way to keep his father from being deported means securing a work
permit. Szpilman secures the document, and his father can work,
but this does not save the family—all will be deported. When the
building is emptied and a woman asks where they will be going, she
is shot by the German commanding officer. When the family is
gathered outside the train landing, the father buys a caramel with all
the funds left among them. He then splits the caramel with a knife
and distributes the pieces to the family members. When the father
is pushed onto the train, a German solder grabs his violin from him.
The father tries to hold onto his most prized possession, his last link
with civilized culture and his work life. The soldier prevails and
aggressively denies the father that last link. Upon returning to their
home in the ghetto, Szpilman sees only bodies, mostly the young.
All of these specific details create an authenticity to the barbarism
of the war against the Jews and the struggle of the Szpilman family
to retain a shred of human feeling and memory.
    The details, the environment, the positioning of the main char-
acter, and the vigor of the plot work together to create the sense of
aloneness of the main character. The performances of the actors
deepen that sense of aloneness.


Directing the Actor

Polanski has always had a courageous approach to casting. He is
very interested in type and in talent. Mia Farrow as Rosemary is
the ultimate angelic victim in appearance; therefore, her tenacity


                            Roman Polanski: The Aloneness of Existence
