intimate than the long shot and consequently yields more emotion
          than longer shots do. We can think of this shot as a mix of infor-
          mation and emotion. Great conversation scenes include Joseph
          Mankiewicz’s “All About Eve” and Howard Hawks’ “His Girl Friday.”
              The next option, the close-up, is principally emotional (think of
          the human face). The primary use of the close-up is for dramatic
          emphasis. The moment Romeo sees Juliet it is time for a close-up.
          Close-ups were also utilized for the moment of violent death in Sam
          Peckinpah’s “The Wild Bunch.” A variation on the close-up is the
          extreme close-up—the missing index finger of the villain in Alfred
          Hitchcock’s “The Thirty-Nine Steps” or the key in Cary Grant’s
88        hand in “Notorious.” This shot is extremely emotional and can be
          used to add a great deal of dramatic emphasis.
              The next variable when it comes to the shot is lens selection.
          A fish-eye lens distorts the faces and objects closest to it and makes
          people and objects in the background seem even farther away. John
          Frankenheimer used this distorting quality to great effect in the
          opening of “Seconds.”
              Use of a wide-angle shot requires being aware of and working
          with the foreground, the midground, and the background. Anthony
          Mann in “El Cid” and John Frankenheimer in “The Manchurian
          Candidate” were particularly effective at manipulating wide-angle
          shots. The wide-angle shot is contextual in that the background and
          midground provide context for the foreground. Aside from the
          considerable amount of visual information in such a shot, the wide-
          angle shot offers an opportunity to visualize conflict, or its opposite,
          in a single shot. Generally, characters presented the same distance
          from the camera are working together, while characters positioned
          at different distances are in effect pitted against one another.
              The normal shot provides some degree of visual context but not
          as much as the wide-angle shot. In the normal shot, the director is
          working with the foreground and midground. The normal shot is
          the workhorse of shots and is the one most often used. It is not as
          elegant or interesting as the wide-angle or telephoto shot.
              Finally, the telephoto shot has a single depth; the midground
          and background are out of focus. The telephoto shot collapses the
          depth of field so distances become difficult to discern. The shot of
          Benjamin running to the church from his failed car in Mike
          Nichols’ “The Graduate” is an example of a telephoto shot. As there


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
