A second visual dimension that enhances our relationship with
       the characters is Moodysson’s use of a hand-held camera. Not as
       extreme as the Dogme use of the hand-held camera, Moodysson
       nevertheless has in the progression of his work opted increasingly
       for hand-held shooting. The danger here is that hand-held shooting
       brings a devil-may-care attitude to the formal qualities of composi-
       tion, opposite that of Ford or Eisenstein. I believe that Moodysson
       has chosen the hand-held camera to get closer to Lilja and Volodya
       and Tess and Geko, and nothing formal should interfere with our
       access to these characters and their availability to us.
           Another dimension of Moodysson’s visual style is that he does
286    not favor the wide-angle lens. Consider Roman Polanski for a
       moment. In “The Pianist,” the camera is placed close to the main
       character and a Warsaw street or a rail station is fully in focus in the
       background. The placement puts us close to the main characters,
       and the lens choice gives context and a sense of how alone that
       character is. When Moodysson chooses a normal or even telephoto
       lens, context collapses and we feel that all that exists is the charac-
       ter. Placements seem dictated by the limits of space but they also
       seem to be about getting close to the character under any circum-
       stances. Although Moodysson gives up the aesthetic bonus of beau-
       tiful framing, he is giving us a clear sense of his priorities: Get close
       to the character under all circumstances. The close-ups, the hand-
       held camera, and the lens choice all support his push to establish
       empathy for the main character and the other characters.
           In terms of his editing choices, they are as distinctive as the cam-
       era choices. The first thing one notices is that Moodysson is inter-
       ested in multiple characters; consequently, he utilizes parallel action
       editing. In “Fucking Åmål,” he introduces Agnes and her obsession
       with Elin and Elin and her obsession with boredom and being some-
       body, and he intercuts their stories with Johan and his interest in
       Elin. The three stories then proceed, intersecting as we move into
       the narrative. Similarly, in “Together” we move between the com-
       mune and Elisabeth and Rolf’s breakup. The intercutting continues
       until Göran brings Elisabeth and her children to the commune.
       Another thread that is introduced in the midst of these two storylines
       is Elisabeth’s younger child, Stefan, and his sense of being an out-
       sider among his own peers. The various story strands and the use of
       parallel editing energize these character-driven stories.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
