The central idea of this book has been that the director of a film
must have a concept, an interpretive idea that I have called the
director’s idea, to determine an effective approach to the text, the
performances, and the camera. With a clear director’s idea, the film
will be deeper, more layered, and more powerful. Without the
director’s idea, the film can still be made, but the audience’s expe-
rience of the film will be flatter. In this sense, the director’s idea is
the path to better directing, possibly even great directing.
    I suggested in Part I that directors fall into particular categories:
competent, good, or great. Competent directing is the baseline for
directing. This category is characterized by a particular view. The
examples that I used, “King Arthur” by Antoine Fuqua and “The                 317
Lighthorsemen” by Simon Wincer, have taken a singular approach
of featuring heroes in war and their adversaries (i.e., the enemy).
These films deploy the romantic idea that men who go to war,
whether they embrace the mission or not, are inevitably romantic
heroes. This romantic idea of heroism was realized by the director’s
camera choices, the performances he drew out of his actors, and his
interpretation of the narrative. These choices applied to all the char-
acters in the films—those helping the main character as well as
those opposing the main character. The experience of these films is
singularly romantic, and the films are entertaining. Competent
directors, such as Antoine Fuqua and Simon Wincer, are effective
in what they set out to do.
    When discussing the good director, I used the examples of
Adrian Lyne and Claude Chabrol. Lyne remade Chabrol’s “Une
Femme Infidele” into “Unfaithful.” Lyne’s film focuses on the
woman as the main character and views the murder of the lover as
an accident, the results of which must be addressed by husband and
wife. The film proceeds as a story of desire and its tragic conse-
quences. In Chabrol’s film, the main character is the husband and
his motivation is jealousy. He has a beautiful wife and assumes she
is bored with him, but he remains overwhelmingly in love with her.
That love takes him from suspicion to painful discovery to murder-
ous rage and back to the stasis of love and acknowledgment of guilt.
The character in the Chabrol film has a powerful inner life, and
Chabrol used feeling and irony to make his motivation seem both
understandable and poignant. There is no such understanding
about the husband in Lyne’s version. He is simply overcome and


                                                                 Conclusion
