Much has been written about the mystique of film directing, so much
so that the craft and the art of directing have been submerged in a
swell of adulation. The adulation is understandable. Film—celluloid
or digital—is the art form of the twentieth century, and the director is
given much of the credit for a film’s success. Paradoxically, directing
remains a vocation that has used its mystique to its advantage; conse-
quently, less is understood about the means of directing than about
the other key roles in production. So, one of the goals of this book is
to develop an understanding of what the director does and, by doing
so, to help the reader become a better director. The path to better
directing is exploring the tools available to the director and under-
standing how those tools can be deployed to make the competent                 3
director a better director and the good director a great director.
    Having stated my über-goal, permit me to step back a bit to con-
textualize the goal of the book. First, the book examines the role of
directing in production. Filmmaking, more than most popular or
elite art forms, is collaborative. Producers, cinematographers, art
designers, sound designers, editors, composers, scriptwriters, and
actors all contribute mightily to the power of a finished film. Many
have used the analogy of the director as the conductor of an orches-
tra or the coach of a sports team. Such analogies are, on one level,
good. The director must marshal a varied group of talented individ-
uals into a winning team and a single voice, and the sum of the
whole must always be greater than the sum of the parts. This is the
directing challenge, and this is where directors distinguish them-
selves as good directors or great directors, as opposed to competent
or less competent directors. To do so, however, the director must be
a politician, technician, storyteller, and artist.
    This book focuses on the director. That is not to say that pro-
ducers, writers, or actors are less important. Indeed, all are critical
to the success of a film, and their roles are clearly understood. The
goal of this book is to make the role of the director equally clear.


What Does the Director Do?

The director is responsible for translating a script (words) into visuals
(shots) that will be turned over to an editor to pull together into a
film. Start and finish points, however, may well blur, as the director


                                                                Introduction
