all truth. Stanislavsky’s examination of acting attempted to method-
       ize the finding of truth. For Stanislavsky, truth was three things (see
       Great Directors at Work, p. 32):

          1. Verisimilitude, which corresponds to what is observable in the
             world (the outer world)
          2. Coherence, an assessment device that is in essence one’s sys-
             tem of belief (equivalent to a character’s subjectivity, or the
             inner world)
          3. The spiritual meaning of life, referring to the notion that spir-
             ituality coexists with material values in a dimension where
112          reality and spirituality complement one another

       Together, these three dimensions are symbiotic and help the actor
       create a truthful character on stage. According to Stanislavsky,

          “What does it mean to be truthful on stage? Does it mean
          that you conduct yourself as you do in ordinary life? Not at
          all. Truthfulness in those terms would be sheer triviality.
          There is the same difference between artistic and inartistic
          truth as exists between a painting and a photograph; the
          latter reproduces everything, the former only what is essen-
          tial” (K. Stanislavsky, Stanislavsky’s Legacy, edited by E.R.
          Hapgood, Theater Arts Books, 1968, p. 20).

           All of the acting philosophies of the past hundred years have
       arisen out of these three ideas about acting. Let’s get specific.



       Outside In

       There is an informal school of acting that coalesces around actors
       such as Lawrence Olivier. Proponents believe that technique begins
       with the outside, what Stanislavsky called verisimilitude. If the actor
       wears the clothes of his character, adopts his manner of walking,
       and has his hair cut as that character would, then that actor can
       begin to work with that exterior to become the character. Other
       British actors such as Michael Caine and Anthony Hopkins have
       found this approach meaningful.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
