authoritarian model of their pastor father is the basis for the
deeper political action taken by “Marianne and Juliane.” They are
rejecting the father and all that his generation stood for.
    In “Rosenstrasse,” the political action is about the preservation of
life and relationships—specifically, the life of a Jewish girl, Ruth,
and a Jewish musician, Fabian. Lena, a German aristocrat and a
woman, stands up against the paternalism of her family, of the army,
and of the State in 1943 Germany. Her actions are pro-life rather
than anti-Nazi, but in acting as she does she is also anti-Nazi.
Although “Rosenstrasse” is closest to being a war film, Von Trotta
minimizes the plot and stays very close to Lena and the other char-
acters in order to highlight and personalize Lena’s political action.       269
Which brings us to the next feature of Von Trotta’s text inter-
pretation. The character arc at the core of each of these films is a
journey, a journey of transformation from what the women were
when we meet them to what they become in the course of the film.
The journey may be a political or personal journey; often it is both.
    For Katharina Blum, it is a journey of realization that one cannot
hide behind the veneer of one’s personality and values. When we
meet Katharina she is shy and modest—as her cousin describes her,
she is a “nun.” The implication is that Katharina is in retreat from
life. When she is attacked, her home is invaded and her life and the
lives of her family are destroyed to feed the press’ appetite for gossip,
negativity, and notoriety. A modest woman is transformed into a
monster. Katharina reacts to protect her inner core. She transgresses
and takes action. By the end, she has become engaged with society
on its own destructive terms.
    For Christa Klages, the transformation is different. She begins as
a person of action, a transgressor, on behalf of her beliefs. The
actions of Ingrid, her friend, on her behalf as well as of Lena,
her captive, who lies to save her from prison, suggest that women
can and should help one another. This feminist take on a male
society—it does not act to save its children but rather cares more for
cars and other material goods and money—transforms a political
activist into a more caring woman. She cares for her daughter, for
Ingrid (battered by her husband), and for Lena, who identifies with
her as a woman rather than with her male employers at the bank.
Also, Lena sees the male policemen persecuting another woman, in
this case Christa.


  Margarethe Von Trotta: Historical Life and Personal Life Intersect
