forceful and charming. Connie is not comfortable renting to a man,
and the resulting clash of personalities only confirms her intuition
about the arrangement. Dingle complicates the rental by subletting
half of his half to Joe Carter (Joel McCrea). Life gets even more
complicated as Joe and Connie fall in love. Dingle plays match-
maker by undermining Connie’s fiancé, a man who earns $8500 per
year. Being a comedy, everything works out happily. The excerpt
that I will focus on is the first morning after Dingle has moved in.
Connie is very organized and has prepared a schedule for them to
get ready for work. Both must shower, dress, and eat breakfast within
30 minutes. Dingle has trouble complying with the schedule, and
the resulting clash of temperaments leads to a scene of classic comic     151
timing and performance. The scene is directed almost as a silent
comedy short.

“A Place in the Sun” (1951)
“A Place in the Sun” is a remake of Theodore Dreiser’s An American
Tragedy. Set in upstate New York, the film tells the story of George
Eastman (Montgomery Clift), an ambitious young man who travels
east to accept the job offer of a rich uncle. He is given a job at the
Eastman plant, first in the shipping area and later in a more mana-
gerial position. In shipping, he meets Alice (Shelley Winters) and
begins a relationship with her, although he has been warned against
having any relationships with the staff (which are mostly women).
Later he meets the rich and beautiful Angela Vickers (Elizabeth
Taylor) and begins a relationship with her. She is the woman of his
dreams and represents moving up the social ladder, but there is a
complication. Alice is pregnant and wants George to marry her. If he
doesn’t, she will reveal all to the Eastmans and to Angela. George
takes Alice on a trip, intending to drown her (she cannot swim), but
he cannot bring himself to do it. Alice stands up in the boat, acci-
dentally falls out, and drowns. The drowning is investigated, and
George is charged with her murder. He is tried, and the film ends
with his execution. George Eastman found the love of his life but
lost it in the end. The excerpt I will focus on here is George’s first
visit to the Eastman mansion. In this scene, George is offered a job
but is barely tolerated by the Eastman family. Angela Vickers is intro-
duced in this scene, but she does not acknowledge his existence. The
scene is full of symbols of wealth and social class.


    George Stevens: The American Character—Desire and Conscience
