lonely, rational woman to a loved and loving woman in “The More
           the Merrier.” Here, Benjamin Dingle (and his enterprising sensi-
           bility) is the catalyst. In his direction of actors, Stevens makes
           certain that this transformation is not only credible but also emo-
           tionally gratifying for his audience.


           Directing the Camera

           Filmmakers who are great directors are of two types: (1) the director
           who favors set pieces, such as Alfred Hitchcock, David Lean, and
156        Steven Spielberg; and (2) directors who focus on the emotional arc
           of the film. These latter directors include Max Ophuls, Luchino
           Visconti, and George Stevens. Stevens is particularly impressive
           with regard to how he created shots for scenes and how those
           shots were edited. In the end, he was subtle but very effective in his
           directing of the camera.
               To explore his director’s idea we begin with an examination of
           Stevens’ work in “A Place in the Sun,” where camera placement
           and art direction operate with considerable force. The set is the
           Eastman mansion. The camera is placed deep inside the house. In
           the far background is the door through which George Eastman
           enters his uncle’s home. Doric columns define the middle of the
           frame and add even greater scale to the house. Charles Eastman
           and his family are seated and observing George’s entry. He walks
           toward the camera, and it seems to be a very long walk. His uncle
           offers George a seat. The camera is now positioned not too close to
           the couch occupied by Charles Eastman’s wife and daughter.
           George sits on a chair in the middle ground. The camera is far from
           the Eastmans and even farther from George. In this shot, we are not
           close to any party. The distance between the Eastmans and George
           is physical but it is also social. The conversation is not an easy one.
           Again we are very aware of the separation between these family
           members. The entire sequence to this point has been shot in long
           and medium shots, again distancing the characters.
               Angela Vickers enters as George did earlier. Stevens cuts to a
           close-up of George as he turns to look at Angela, then a close-up of
           Angela as she stops near George but speaks to his family. Notable is
           the fact that she does not even look at George. The attention and


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
