global director. Xiang Yimou (“Hero”) and Wong Kar Wai (“In the
Mood for Love”), both of China, focus on style over content and
have been a profound influence on young filmmakers all over the
world. Although this movement began with Quentin Tarantino and
“Pulp Fiction,” global directors have not followed the same path.
Each has adopted a powerful style but made individual choices
about their approach to content—specifically, whether it should be
stylized or more emotionally available. (For a discussion of voice-
oriented genres and the ascent of voice see my earlier book,
Global Scriptwriting, Focal Press, 2001.) This globalization has been
a powerful influence on Moodysson and his approach to his work.
                                                                           277
“Fucking Åmål” (1998)
“Fucking Åmål” refers to the exclamation of the main character,
Elin (Alexandra Dahlström), who makes the statement to her sister,
Jessica: “Why do we have to live in fucking piss and shit Åmål?”
(Åmål is a small town in Sweden.) Elin is a beautiful 14 year old.
She is popular with a bad reputation for being easy with the boys;
nevertheless, Johan (Mathias Rust) is obsessed with her and thinks
he is in love. Elin thinks she will be Miss Sweden but her older
sister tells her she is too short. Elin is bored with it all (“I hate my
life”) and she needs the stimulus of sex, drugs, and rock and roll.
She is looking for a change.
    Agnes (Rebecka Liljeberg) is turning 16. Her concerned parents
want her to be happy and popular, so her mother cooks meat for a
party to which Agnes, a vegetarian, is uncertain if anyone will come.
Her father is concerned and heavily identifies with his daughter.
She is new to the neighborhood, and her parents hope that a party
will make her feel that she belongs. Agnes knows this will not
happen. The reason why she feels like an outsider is because she is
gay and in love with Elin, but the aggressively heterosexual Elin
does not even know Agnes exists.
    Elin’s mother does not want her daughter to go out; she considers
her provocative dress to be a prescription for disaster. Agnes’ party
seems safe, though, and Elin’s mother allows her and Jessica to go off
to Agnes’ party. They and a girl in a wheelchair are the only guests.
During the party, Agnes suggests a wager between the sisters. To win
the bet, Elin kisses Agnes. After a quick glass of wine, though, Elin
and Jessica leave. Agnes is so despondent that her father fears she may


                                 Lukas Moodysson: Empathy and Its Limits
