performance, and the editor uses shots and sound. The means
      differ but the goal is the same: Tell the story as clearly and as
      strongly as you can.
   2. Making a film is both a creative and organizational challenge,
      akin to setting up, operating, and shutting down a small (or
      mid-size) business; consequently, the director needs a creative
      team (actors, cinematographers and crew, sound and crew, art
      director and crew, editor and crew), as well as an organization
      team (producer, production manager, script supervisor, assis-
      tant director), and must get along with both teams. Think of
      this role as a mix of general and captain.
   3. Many different styles of leadership can be effective.                  11
   4. Making a film requires making hundreds of decisions each
      day.
   5. Directors can never be over-prepared.
   6. Directing is technical, intellectual, emotional, and creative.
      The more layers operating for the director, the more likely
      the film will be lively and engaging.
   7. Actors are critical to the success of a film; they are the front
      line, the great risk takers in a production. Because of the risks
      they take, they deserve the respect of their directors.
   8. Character matters. Good and great directing is fueled by the
      character of the director. By character I mean that vague mix
      of ethics and behavior that make each of us who we are. False
      character, conversely, does not make for good directing.
   9. The story, whether 30 seconds or 3 hours, can be told in
      many ways. The emphasis or interpretation of a director will
      depend on that director’s interests, intuition, and belief sys-
      tem. One interpretation is not necessarily better than
      another. It is simply different. And herein lies another path-
      way to viewing directing as a unique expression of the direc-
      tor (as opposed to an objective view of the work).
  10. Technology is not a solution to the directing challenge.
      Technology is just technology. Directing is the human factor
      in the directorial equation.

And now let us begin.




                                                              Introduction
