Dogme 95, have maintained the handheld shot as a central tenet
      of their cinematic goals; for example, Thomas Vinterberg’s “The
      Celebration” was shot entirely using handheld cameras. On the
      other hand, most feature films around the world are photographed
      using cameras mounted on tripods.

      Movement from a Fixed Point
      Camera movement from a fixed point takes three forms: tilt, pan, or
      zoom. The tilt shot is a vertical movement, up–down or down–up.
      Generally, the tilt shot is used to follow action or to transition from
      one location to another. The tilt shot can also simulate the eye
92    movement of a character as that character looks up or down. The
      tilt shot is rarely used for dramatic emphasis.
           The pan, or panning, shot follows movement along a horizontal
      axis, left to right or right to left. As in the case of the tilt, the pan
      follows action or simulates eye movement. In both the tilt and
      the pan, the camera is on a tripod, which remains stationary. The
      camera pivots are guided by the hand of the skilled camera opera-
      tor; consequently, the movement tends to be smooth. More rapid
      movement can be used, but the visual information in the shot tends
      to blur. The more rapid the movement, the lower the actual visual
      information and the greater the blur. The illusion of movement is
      all that results when the cameraman uses a swish pan, a very rapid
      movement. This shot has been used as a transition from one loca-
      tion to another. It has also been used to simulate the excitement
      within a scene. Richard Lester used numerous swish pans in the
      performance sequence that concludes his “A Hard Day’s Night.”
      The excitement of the audience for The Beatles is emphasized by
      the use of swish pans.
           The zoom shot relies on a lens that can be moved from a wide-
      angle shot to telephoto or the reverse. In both cases, the zoom is
      used to avoid cutting from a long shot to a close-up. Aside from the
      economic benefit of one setup instead of two, numerous directors
      from Visconti to Altman, from Kubrick to Peckinpah have used
      the zoom shot to lengthen a shot. Each had an aesthetic goal.
      In Kubrick’s case (for example, in “Barry Lyndon”), he wanted
      to slow down our sense of time. “Barry Lyndon” is a film about
      an 18th-century character made by a 20th-century filmmaker aware
      that slowing down the film by using zooms will slow down the


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
