and for the first time Marie feels and expresses visually a different
kind of pleasure. In our discussion of “Romance” we will focus on
the birthing scene that concludes the film.

“Fat Girl” (2001)
“Fat Girl” is in some ways Breillat’s most shocking film. Two sisters are
on vacation in the southwest with their parents. It is off season. The
main character, Anaïs Pingot (Anaïs Reboux), is the fat girl of the title.
She is the younger sister and clearly suffers because her sister, Elena
(Roxane Mesquida), is beautiful. Elena is impulsive in love. She picks
up a young Italian law student, Fernando (Libero De Rienzo), and
proceeds into the relationship as if he were the love of her life. Elena       293
is cruel to her sister, blaming Anaïs and belittling her for her eating, all
the while forcing her to eat to shut her up. Anaïs is also the scapegoat
for her mother and father. The height of Elena’s cruelty is the fact that
she invites Fernando into her bed while sharing a room with Anaïs.
Her sexual initiation with Fernando is witnessed by Anaïs. When
Elena loses her virginity to Fernando, Anaïs is again a witness. There
is no end to the emotional torment of her older sister. All the while,
Anaïs is curious about her own developing sexuality. A family crisis
develops when Fernando’s mother arrives to reclaim a ring Fernando
gave Elena to coax her into bed with him. Anaïs’ father has already
returned to work, and her mother retreats from the humiliation by cut-
ting short the vacation and returning home. The mother is particularly
punitive to Anaïs, who becomes car sick on the way home. The car
ride is long, and the number of trucks on the road seems to make the
ride more dangerous. The mother passes many trucks, but as night
falls she tires and pulls into a rest stop to sleep. A truck also pulls into
the rest stop, and the driver eyes them. Later the driver attacks them in
their car. He axes Elena to death and chokes the mother to death.
Anaïs witnesses the killings and tries to escape, but the killer takes her
into the woods and rapes her. The film ends with the police recover-
ing Anaïs and her denial of being touched. The scene we will focus on
is the drive toward home, the killings, and the rape. The end of the
film can be experienced as the culmination of the war between men
and women for power, in this case on the road. The scene can also be
read as a projection of Anaïs’ anger toward her sister and mother for
their persistent persecution of Anaïs. She has not caused either of them
any harm but they still hurt her.


                            Catherine Breillat: The Warfare of Sexuality
