they highlight Spielberg’s virtuosity as a director. I should add that I
could have chosen four or fourteen other excerpts and they would
have made the same point.

“Jaws” (1975)
“Jaws” focuses on the efforts of a small-town police chief, Brody, to
halt a killer shark that is terrorizing his island town. The town is a
popular summer resort, and the mayor is pressuring Brody to min-
imize the danger and maximize economic activity on the island.
The police chief’s primary concern, however, is protecting human
life. He is aided by an experienced fisherman (Robert Shaw) and
by a shark expert (Richard Dreyfuss). The actions of the shark and         249
the attempt to stop it are the plot. The conflict of material versus
human values is the primary character struggle, particularly for
the police chief. The film is a thriller and proceeds realistically
from the shark’s first kill to the killing of the shark. The excerpt we
will focus on is a beach scene. Everyone is enjoying a sunny day
at the beach except for Brody, who is sitting there watching for
signs of the shark. The mood of the beachgoers contrasts sharply
with the anxiety of the police chief. The shark does attack, and
this time its victim is a young boy. The police chief can do noth-
ing but herd people out of the water. The mother of the boy is in
shock, and the other swimmers are panic stricken as they abandon
the water for the safety of the shore. The scene has a powerful
point of view—Brody’s.

“Raiders of the Lost Ark” (1981)
“Raiders of the Lost Ark” follows the efforts of Indiana Jones
(Harrison Ford), a youthful archeologist, to recover for the
American government an ancient artifact, the Lost Ark of
Solomon’s temple, last housed in Jerusalem. Also in pursuit of the
Ark is the Nazi government of Germany who is interested in har-
nessing the power of the Ark for their own purposes. The time is the
1930s. The search takes Indiana Jones from the United States to a
Greek island where the fate of the Ark is resolved. Jones is aided by
an Egyptian colleague (Jonathan Rhys-Davies). The sequence we
will focus on takes place at a dig site in Egypt. The Ark has been
found by Indiana Jones but has been stolen by a French archeolo-
gist working for the Germans. The Ark is being transported to its


                                    Steven Spielberg: Childhood Forever
