aggression and their contempt for the rest of humanity. This theatri-
cality surrounds the main characters and challenges them to join if
they can. In each case, whatever poignancy these characters gener-
ate emanates from their inability to be accepted by the poseurs who
are closer to celebrity than they are.



Directing the Camera

If the director’s idea is to link celebrity and banality, how does
Harron frame her shots and organize her images to support that idea?
The first notable visualization of the idea is the opening of each film.   313
Humanity and the humanness of her characters are notably absent
in the opening of “American Psycho.” Instead, we see a series of
close-ups of sliced duck breast surrounded by raspberries. Other
close-ups of beautifully prepared food follow. The camera looks
down from above on these dishes. The cutting makes the scene
aggressive rather than aesthetic. The cutaways to mid shots of waiters
reciting the exotic special of the day present the point of view of a
paying customer who is distant and disdainful. The images distance
us from the people and focus on an aggressive, disembodied aes-
thetic—Harron’s version of the culture of consumption.
    Although “I Shot Andy Warhol” opens with the shooting of Andy
Warhol, the scene lacks any humanity. Replacing narrative conti-
nuity and causality are shots of the Factory, the cowboy boots of the
wounded Andy Warhol, Valerie in mid shot with gun in hand, and
her leave-taking having expended all the bullets in her gun. It is a
scene of consequences of actions rather than the actions them-
selves. The result is unstable and unnerving in its jumpy detailing.
Harron quickly follows with a fragmented biography of Valerie.
Home footage, black-and-white interview footage, and staged uni-
versity scenes characterize Valerie as a good student who has been
sexually abused. Although declaring herself gay, she could be het-
erosexual when she needed to be. Valerie’s notion of sex as currency
is quickly established, as is her hatred of men. Jump cutting and
camera movement give the scenes an observational rather than
involving quality.
    In both sequences, the visualization works with the idea of
celebrity and banality in a particular way. Andy Warhol’s blonde wig

                                     Mary Harron: Celebrity and Banality
