Ford utilized a mid shot when Wyatt and Clementine watch the
energetic men and women dancing together and he slowly offers
himself to Clementine as a dance partner. Ford films the dance
itself in long shot, with the camera still and recording the sky,
church foundation, and stiff Wyatt Earp dancing with his “lady fair.”
As in “The Searchers,” there is no pace to speak of in this scene
from “My Darling Clementine.” The movement within the frame
is ritualistic, whereas the movement of the camera shot earlier in
the sequence was energizing and deeply felt. The contrast moves
the scene from feeling to ritual and in doing so alludes to
Tombstone’s movement from its past into its future. The composi-
tion and the steady camera position take the narrative content in the       145
direction of the music. The scene implies a future for the town, as
well as for Wyatt Earp and Clementine. The poetic stirring within
the scene merges character and place. The low camera angle that
characterizes all of the shots at the church service gives this portion
of the sequence a heroic quality that creates confidence in the
vision of all who are participating in the service.
    So far we have focused on the compositional choices Ford used
to support his director’s idea. Let’s now examine how he used light
and art direction to support the ideas of poetics and heroism. In
“They Were Expendable,” the hospital scene is set in an aircraft
hangar. The long, round shape of the hospital is revealed by irregu-
larly placed lighting; entire sections of the hangar/hospital do not
appear to be lit. In a number of scenes in this excerpt, the majority
of characters are underlit. Light falls across their feet and, if they
stand in particular locations, across their face. We are always aware
of the source of the light. Often, the lights are at the back of a shot
and low so the background is awash in light while the foreground is
dark. This same principle is applied to source light during an air
raid. The lights are shot out, and the source light becomes a flash-
light. When necessary, Sandy or the doctor shines the flashlight on
a wound. In this scene, as opposed to earlier scenes in the hospital,
Ford moves into close-ups to register Sandy’s feelings about the
life-and-death operations in which she is participating.
    Generally, our image of hospitals is of overlit settings where noth-
ing is hidden. Ford presented the hospital as a more abstract place as
if to propose that in the absence of light there is an absence of life
and in the presence of too much light there is too much feeling or


                                            John Ford: Poetry and Heroism
