Would he act? Or would he be more subtle? Intention illustrates the
character’s thought process, intelligence, and chosen pathway for
achieving his objective.
   Image refers to the surround of the character, what the character
would notice in the world—the things and the people and how they
transport a character to the sensual world of seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting, and touching. The more specific the images the
actor considers, the more complex will be their interactions with the
world. Image is not necessarily specific to the script. It can be what-
ever the actor experiences in order to give his character dimension
within the world of the script. Image also tells us something nonver-
bal about the character and can be used to make the character’s               117
world and the characterization richer in imagination (surprise).
   Facts are used to create a reality for a character. The more the
actor knows about the character or develops through improvisation,
the greater the sense of reality for that character. Facts give a char-
acter a past and may imply that the character believes in or is mov-
ing toward a future. One element of fact is belief. Belief animates a
character’s movement through the story. Belief is a function of the
goals, hopes, and needs of a character. In this sense, belief supplies
the energy and movement of the character. This energy is critical to
the audience. It helps them identify with the character better.
When we see a sense of belief in a performance, we are drawn to the
character.
   Physical life is an important complement to the sense of belief.
The actor must physicalize his performance, which requires turning
intention into a physical manifestation. It also requires the actor to
physicalize his interactions with the setting as well as with other
characters. Costumes and makeup, together with posture and car-
riage, help the actor create the physical parameters of a character.
In order to animate the physical and the sense of belief, actors need
to find specific gestures and actions that delineate the character.
Generality moves us away from the character; specifics move us into
the character. An effort to be as specific as possible is critical in the
creation of a performance.
   Finally, it is critical that a character listen to the other characters.
Active listening will convey the impression that the actor is part of
the scene, but an actor who is perceived as not listening will disen-
gage the audience. An actor who is obviously listening will appear


                                                                     The Actor
