shooting is complicated and suggests that the reporter read her man-
ifesto to understand why she shot Warhol. Andy Warhol’s acolytes
are interviewed about the shooting. His wig is retrieved. The next
scene focuses on Valerie being interviewed by the police. What
follows is Valerie’s personal history until she goes to New York fol-
lowing college. The history is described by the prison psychologist.
    The film’s ending follows a series of sharp short scenes. Candy
Darling, Valerie’s friend Jeremiah (Danny Morgenstern), and
Valerie watch and editorialize about the Miss America pageant. The
next scene is a television interview with Valerie (remember that
Valerie has yearned for celebrity). The interview set up by Jeremiah
proves to be a disaster. A right wing host looks only to belittle Valerie   307
for her lesbian appearance and radical political views. He baits her
and finally she physically attacks him and walks out on the interview;
subsequently, she beats Jeremiah and Candy. She then threatens
Girodias and threatens Stevie (Martha Plimpton) with a gun. Stevie
throws her out. She visits Girodias’ office and tells his secretary that
the next time she sees him she will kill him. She waits for Warhol on
the street level of the Factory. She joins him on the elevator and
enters his apartment. He takes a call, ignoring her. She takes out her
pistol and shoots him and a colleague. When she leaves she
announces to a policeman she is wanted, that she shot Andy Warhol.
The scene that follows shows both Warhol and Valerie hospitalized.
An epilogue explains the fate of Candy Darling, Andy Warhol, and
Valerie Solanas. The film ends with a statement by Valerie on the
lack of need for reproduction and future generations.

“American Psycho” (2000)
“American Psycho” opens on an elegant meal in an elegant restau-
rant. The food is shown being prepared, arriving at the table, and
being eaten. The preparations are elegant and beautiful but some-
how violent. So, too, is the consumption of the meal. Patrick
Bateman (Christian Bale) and his colleagues are elegant but aggres-
sive. They talk, the conversation is elevated in its sophistication, but
it doesn’t go anywhere. We are aware mainly of the aggression each
hurls at the other. They continue on to an expensive club where
Bateman, our main character, is abusive verbally but she, the
bartender, doesn’t respond. Was it an imagined conversation? It
seems to be.


                                     Mary Harron: Celebrity and Banality
