Introduction

George Stevens, like John Ford, began his career making short films.
In 1927, Stevens was making comedies with Laurel and Hardy.
Although he began as a cinematographer, he began directing in 1930.
He directed his last film, “The Only Game in Town,” in 1968. In
between, he made important films in the genres of musical (“Swing
Time,” 1936), situation comedy (“The More the Merrier,” 1943),
action adventure (“Gunga Din,” 1939), Western (“Shane,” 1953),
and melodrama (“A Place in the Sun,” 1951). Whether working on
a modest scale (“Alice Adams,” 1935) or on a large canvas (“Giant,”
1956), Stevens’ work had an emotional power that has marked the            149
work of important directors from D.W. Griffith to Istvan Szabo.
    To understand his importance, we must examine Stevens’ direc-
tor’s idea. George Stevens was interested in what I will call the
American character, but he was not engaged with the poetic iconog-
raphy of John Ford or the romanticized populist view of Frank
Capra. Instead, Stevens seemed to be interested in a more complex
view of the American character. Two opposing qualities stand out in
Stevens’ work: the characteristic of desire and at the other extreme
the characteristic of conscience. Desire and conscience might be
embedded in different characters in a Stevens film, or they might be
embedded in the same character. However he presented them,
Stevens was able to look at the many aspects of the American
character in all its contradictions—idealism versus self-interest, class
versus classlessness, generosity versus greed. The result is consider-
able complexity and emotional credibility. Whatever genre Stevens
worked in he was able to create a character arc and a dramatic arc
that had an emotional synchronicity. The result was a series of films
unique in American film for their mix of artistic and commercial
ambition and success. The spirit of those impulses has been kept
alive by Stevens’ son, George Stevens, Jr., who in 1968 established
the American Film Institute. George Stevens, Jr., also made a fine
documentary about his father’s work, “George Stevens: A Film-
maker’s Journey” (1985). A recent compilation of interviews with
George Stevens is an invitation to revisit his work (see P. Cronin,
Ed., George Stevens Interviews, University Press of Mississippi,
2004). In this chapter, we will focus on five excerpts from Stevens’
work that illustrate his director’s idea.

    George Stevens: The American Character—Desire and Conscience
