exception; because Breillat was working with performers as charac-
ters in that film, both the director and the actors worked within a
greater range than displayed in the performances in the three other
films discussed in this chapter. More typical is the pain to passive
range of Amira Casar in “Anatomy of Hell.” Caroline Ducey as
Marie in “Romance” had a similar range, although in both films
there is a change in the last shot. Not quite pleasure, but perhaps an
openness to pleasure, is expressed by Amira Casar as “Anatomy of
Hell” ends. Caroline Ducey is less ambiguous when Marie’s child
is born. Marie seems to have some hope for the future, whereas
until this point she had been obsessively focused on the moment
and anticipation of release or relief.                                   297
    Finally, an important element of the performance is for actors to
imply or project a feeling about their own sexuality. That feeling
might be benign as in “Anatomy of Hell.” It might be curiosity as in
“Fat Girl.” It might be obsession as in “Romance.” Whatever the
dimension Breillat is trying to capture, it is far from the heavy
breathing and glazed eyes that so often pass for performance and
sexuality in many films.


Directing the Camera

The visual look of Breillat’s work tends to be romantic. The open-
ing of “Sex Is Comedy” and the opening of “Romance” both have
an aesthetically pleasing set design, as does “Anatomy of Hell.” But
this is where performance and visuals begin to collide. The actors
are miserable on the beach in “Sex Is Comedy.” Marie is profoundly
frustrated with her boyfriend in “Romance.” A woman attempts sui-
cide in “Anatomy of Hell.” In this sense, the visual look of the films
makes the unhappiness of the characters ironic. And we are curious
as to why.
    A second visual component is that Breillat saves close-ups for
vital parts rather than vital dramatic moments; otherwise, her visual
style does not emotionalize scenes. On the contrary, her intent
seems to be to objectify her characters and objectify the sexual act.
Longs shots tend to objectify rather than emotionalize. When Marie
gets undressed in front of her boyfriend, we can see her disrobing in
the same shot that registers her boyfriend’s indifference.


                          Catherine Breillat: The Warfare of Sexuality
