“East of Eden” (1954)
       Turning to “East of Eden,” we focus on the opening. The time is
       1907; the place is Monterey, California. Cal Trask is following a
       woman, Kate (Jo Van Fleet) to her bank. Kate is a madam and is
       making a substantial deposit. He follows her to her home, where she
       looks out her window and tries to figure out who he is. He is too well
       dressed and young to be one of her customers. Kate asks the girl
       cleaning the floor about him. She says she saw the boy there last
       night, asking about Kate. Cal pitches a stone and shatters the front
       window. Kate summons a man who is more handyman than body-
       guard. He rushes out and tries to reason with Cal. Cal’s response is
196    to send a message back to Kate, “Tell her I hate her.” He then rushes
       to catch the train back to Salinas. We will soon learn that Kate is
       Cal’s mother and that she deserted him and his brother when they
       were infants. She also shot their father when he tried to stop her.
       Kate is settled in Monterey while her husband Adam has become a
       farmer in Salinas and raised their two sons.


       “America, America” (1963)
       The last excerpt is the engagement scene from “America, America.”
       To this point, Stavros has endured robbery, the loss of all his family’s
       worldly possessions entrusted to him, the effort to earn the £110 fee
       for passage from Constantinople to New York, the theft of his
       earnings, and almost dying in a police raid on a political meeting
       he was attending. Stavros, not a man to be discouraged, allows his
       cousin to introduce him to a rich businessman with four unmarried,
       rather plain daughters. The scene begins in the midst of a dowry
       negotiation. The prospective father-in-law, surrounded by his broth-
       ers and Stavros’ cousin, suggests a £500 dowry. Stavros refuses. The
       man, angry then conciliatory, asks what Stavros wants. Stavros asks
       for £110, the exact price of one fare to America. Mr. Sinnikoglou is
       perplexed but agrees, to the chagrin of Stavros’ cousin.
           The scene shifts to a celebratory lunch. Thomna flutters
       about, as do all the women. She worries about pleasing Stavros.
       Mr. Sinnikoglou says he will not be able to eat until the next day,
       but his wife thinks he will be hungry again in a few hours. Clearly
       a rich man attached to his lifestyle and his family, he wants to
       speak to his future son-in-law. We can see that Thomna is his


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
