Introduction

Individual will struggling powerfully against another person, family,
society—this is Elia Kazan’s view of the world that infuses his films.
Kazan in his time was the most celebrated director of theater
and film in the United States. Working with Arthur Miller and
Tennessee Williams on stage or with playwrights and novelists
such as Moss Hart, John Steinbeck, Paul Osborne, Budd Schulberg,
and William Inge, Kazan created a unique group of films. Although
his reputation was tarnished and career ruined by his testimony
before the House Un-American Activities Committee in the 1950s,
his work as a director is unique in American film. His director’s            189
idea, that drama is life, infuses his work with a rawness that makes
his films stand apart.
    What do I mean by drama is life? What I mean is that there
are no quiet moments in a Kazan character or film. The character
is conflicted in an extreme fashion. Torn between personal desires
and pleasing others, Kazan’s characters see the world as an emo-
tionally violent place. Secondary characters are equally volcanic.
The result is an emotional quest that never ends. Kazan was a
serious filmmaker attracted to serious subject matter, but at the
core his films and the characters that inhabit them are combustible
characters who can explode or implode. This is why I suggest that
Kazan’s director’s idea is that drama is life. I could add that it is
a struggle to the spiritual or physical death, an interpretation that
would move Kazan’s work toward that of John Cassavetes, the film-
maker to whom his director’s idea is closest. Kazan’s work, however,
takes place more in the outer world than Cassavetes’ films.
    In “Splendor in the Grass” (1961), Bud (Warren Beatty) and
Deanie (Natalie Wood) are adolescents at a turning point. Will
they do their parents’ bidding, or will they give in to their desire
for each other? In this struggle, the parents prevail, and although
Bud and Deanie move on in life, they do so diminished by the
lost love.
    In “Viva Zapata” (1952), Emiliano Zapata (Marlon Brando) is a
peasant with a sense of injustice about his life and society. Zapata,
however, is not political in a political world, and he suffers for being
a principled idealist. Indeed, he is killed by the politicians who
considered his existence to be a threat.

                                                 Elia Kazan: Drama as Life
