choice of narrative tools to tell their stories. The directors I have
chosen to discuss here—Pedro Almodovar, Denys Arcand, and Emir
Kusturica—share the attitude that narrative tools should be driven by
the directors’ narrative ambition to tell a culturally specific story that
nevertheless reaches beyond borders. These filmmakers are looking at
the global themes of friendship, family, the roles of men and women,
birth, death, love, and relationships to tell their stories in ways that
have made each of them important throughout the world of film.
    Pedro Almodovar has been making films for more than 20 years.
Initially, he made melodramas about being gay. In the last few years,
however, Almodovar has settled on a specific director’s idea that has
transformed his work. Almodovar’s director’s idea is that men and             65
women exist in each of us, whatever our gender. The result is a male
nurse and a female bullfighter in “Talk to Her” (2002) and a father
who has become a woman with breasts and an actor who has also
become a woman in “All About My Mother” (2000). In “All About
My Mother,” the story is essentially that of a mother who, at the out-
set of the story, loses her adolescent son in a car accident. She then
returns to Barcelona to tell the father, her husband, only to discover
that he has become a man with breasts. But he/she is as irresponsi-
ble a person as he/she was before the sex-change operation. The
mother chooses to live with a friend, an actor who has also had a sex-
change operation. The story is rounded out by the inclusion of a
pregnant nun whose family has rejected her. The woman’s husband
dies of AIDS, the nun dies in childbirth, and a new family is formed
when the female main character and her transsexual friend adopt the
baby, albeit the new father is visually a female. The story sounds
dark, but actually Almodovar’s bright art direction and cinematogra-
phy lighten the mood, which becomes one of acceptance of all these
characters and their personal transgressions and gender blurring.
    That blurring is more subtle in “Talk to Her.” This film focuses on
four characters and three relationships. The first relationship is
between two men: a male nurse and a journalist. They are introduced
to us at a dance performance just before they meet for the first time.
The course of their relationship is the core of the story. The male
nurse is rather feminine, while the more masculine journalist is gruff
and mildly depressed. There is always the feeling that the male nurse
hopes that this relationship might evolve into a love relationship (but
it never does).


                                                         The Great Director
