For Juliane, the leftist reporter, her transformation through her
       commitment to her dead sister (another politically active woman)
       transforms her into a woman who can be a caregiver, a mother. At
       the end, she will care for Jan, Marianne’s son, and patiently raise
       him, at the very least to understand his dead mother. Juliane is a
       very different woman when the film ends than she was when the
       film began.
           The transformation in “Rosenstrasse” is principally Hannah’s
       transformation. By developing a relationship with Lena, Hannah
       learns about her mother’s history, her mother’s loss in 1943 of her
       own mother, and her finding a surrogate mother in Lena. When
270    we meet Hannah she is angry with her mother, Ruth, who at the
       funeral of her husband rejected Luis, Hannah’s gentile fiancé.
       Should she, too, reject Luis? She is unsure. Until she knows her
       mother’s history and therefore her own she is unsure how to proceed
       so she avoids Luis.
           Only when she is given her grandmother’s ring by Lena (who has
       held the ring since 1945 for Ruth) does she realize the depth of the
       loss her mother experienced. She returns the ring to Ruth, who now
       feeling acknowledged by her daughter, offers it back to Hannah.
       This symbolic piece of Ruth’s own mother then binds the genera-
       tions and Hannah has permission to move on. The film ends with
       her marriage to Luis. The life cycle can begin again for Hannah
       who will contribute to the continuity of her family.


       Directing the Actor

       In terms of casting, Von Trotta is very particular about the look of
       the actors. The women tend to have a strong look—Angela
       Winkler’s innocence in “The Lost Honor of Katharina Blum,” Tina
       Engel’s forcefulness in “The Second Awakening of Christa Klages,”
       Jutta Lampe’s strength in “Sisters” and “Marianne and Juliane,” and
       Barbara Sukowa’s charisma in “Marianne and Juliane” and in “Rosa
       Luxemburg.” The women are not Marilyn Monroe beautiful, but
       their faces are interesting and their beauty grows as we become
       more familiar with them as characters. It is safe to say that Von
       Trotta is above all interested in strong women. That is not to say she
       does not cast against type. Katja Riemann has a very feminine, soft


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
