The first step toward developing a director’s idea is reading or inter-
preting the script. Every script, every story can be interpreted in
many ways. A writer has fashioned the story using a mix of narrative
tools: a premise, a generally goal-oriented main character who is
faced with having to choose between two opposing alternatives, and
two groups of secondary characters, one of which helps the main
character and one that stands in opposition. In terms of structure, the
narrative is organized from a critical moment to its resolution along
a course of rising action—barriers, people, or events that make it
increasingly more difficult for the main character to achieve his goal.
The structure includes a plot layer and a character layer and is con-
tained within a genre that implies its own dramatic arc. Finally, the          73
voice of the writer is embedded in the tone of the narrative.
    This is the narrative organization to which the director adds his
interests, his character, and his specific interpretation. The goal of
this chapter is to suggest that the director’s interpretation is the crit-
ical first step of the decision-making process. It is during this phase
that the director’s idea is born.
    Before discussing strategies that aid development of the director’s
interpretation, we need to understand that in every story there exist
many interpretations. I have already referred to various interpreta-
tions of the same story—the adaptations of “Lolita” (1962), of “Une
Femme Infidele” (1967), and of “The Manchurian Candidate”
(1962). It would be useful to hold onto these examples while read-
ing this chapter. A useful place for us to begin our discussion is
those cases in the popular literature for which numerous interpre-
tations already exist, such as Shakespeare’s play “Hamlet.”
    “Hamlet” is the story of the young adult son of a king. His father
has died, and his mother has married his uncle, who becomes the
king. Hamlet, motivated by an encounter with his father’s troubled
ghost, learns that his father was poisoned. Driven by a desire for
revenge, he puts on a play that reenacts the murder. Seeing his
uncle’s troubled response, he plots revenge. Hamlet sidesteps a per-
sonal relationship with the young Ophelia, avoids his uncle’s
attempt to get rid of him (Rosencrantz and Gildenstern), and fights
Ophelia’s brother, Laertes, who is armed with a poisoned sword and
wounds Hamlet. Hamlet kills Laertes and his uncle, Claudius, and
then he himself dies. This story can be interpreted as either a
revenge story or as a palace tale of power politics.


                                                         Text Interpretation
