dramatic end of the spectrum, sound is used to deepen the emotions
surrounding a narrative event or character.
    To elaborate what sound is, consider the three broad categories
of voice, sound effects, and music. Pitch, amplitude, and the juxta-
position of sounds will all impact the feelings of the audience. Also,
consider that sound works with the visual images to affect how the
audience processes their experience; consequently, sound is critical
to the audience’s interpretation of the events in the film. Sound can
define or alter meaning but above all leads us to meaning when
compared to the visual.
    The greatest proponent of the importance of sound over the last
30 years has been Walter Murch. His sound work with Francis Ford            97
Coppola on “The Conversation” and “Apocalypse Now” is classic
in its focus on the complex, creative deployment of sound. More
recently, Murch was the editor on Anthony Minghella’s “The
English Patient” and “Cold Mountain” (2003), and the sound in
each of these films is as impressive as his earlier work with Francis
Ford Coppola. Other directors who have employed sound to great
effect include Christopher Nolan in “Memento” and “Insomnia,”
Krystof Kieslowski in “Red,” and Danny Boyle in “Trainspotting.”
Sound, whether deployed naturalistically or dramatically, can pow-
erfully highlight the director’s idea.


The Edit
Directors must keep in mind that the shots they orchestrate in
production must give the editor the material necessary to execute
the director’s idea. That means producing adequate coverage to
make sure the film can be edited, in addition to shots that provide
the performances and elements additional to the performances that
contribute to the director’s idea. Key to achieving that idea are
ten important editing ideas, which are addressed in the following
discussion.

Continuity
The issue of editing for continuity can be addressed by having
several ideas operational during the production. Whenever a new
location is introduced, a location shot (generally a long or extreme


                                                               The Camera
