film stars, including Buster Keaton in “Sunset Boulevard,” Erich
       Von Stroheim as Irwin Rommel in “Five Graves to Cairo” (1943),
       and Otto Preminger as the camp commandant in “Stalag 17.”
           Although to a certain extent Wilder cast for type (Jack Lemmon,
       Walter Matthau, and Tony Curtis, for example), he was as likely to
       challenge type in casting. Consider his use of Fred MacMurray in
       “Double Indemnity” as the romantic hero and later as the antagonist
       in “The Apartment.” MacMurray’s performance in the latter has a
       coldness to it that makes Sheldrake the exact opposite of Baxter, the
       main character. Wilder also used Ray Milland in similar fashion. In
       “The Major and the Minor” (1942), Ray Milland is the romantic lead
170    to Ginger Rogers, who plays an adult pretending to be 14 years old to
       secure a children’s fare train ticket back to the Midwest. In 1945,
       Wilder cast Milland as the alcoholic lead in “The Lost Weekend.”
       Here, a tortured inner life has replaced the honorable life of a major.
           Certain characteristics notable in Wilder characters made many
       demands on his actors. First, Wilder characters have a self-awareness
       that expresses itself in irony or self-deprecation and requires a per-
       formance capable of evoking this emotional complexity when the
       character steps out of character and comments on himself. Consider
       Joe Gillis in “Sunset Boulevard,” C.C. Baxter in “The Apartment,”
       and Walter Neff in “Double Indemnity.” Neff, in particular, confesses
       to the audience in the narration—he acted for money and the woman.
       He reflects: “I didn’t get the money and I didn’t get the woman.”
           Another issue is the dialectic that exists between a character’s
       aggressive pursuit of a goal and his vulnerability. This is where we
       begin to perceive the humanity of the character. Neff’s love/desire for
       Phyllis was sexual and bottomless enough for him to agree to embez-
       zle from his insurance company and kill a man. Here, the relationship
       is all about sexual desire. In Neff’s relationship with Barton Keyes we
       see another side to the man—his vulnerability. Neff is always lighting
       Keyes’ cigar, and Keyes is always confessing to, confiding in, comple-
       menting Neff. He tries to enlist Neff as his assistant, promising that the
       satisfaction would be greater although the money would be less. The
       distracted Neff, now involved in the Dietrichson issue, is compli-
       mented and touched by Keyes’ offer. The scene reveals another side of
       Neff. When Keyes becomes angry at Neff’s turning down the offer, he
       insults Neff. Neff’s response is “I love you too.” It is in those scenes
       with Keyes that Neff reveals his vulnerable self.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
