Each of these directors transforms his narrative into something
bigger, deeper, and different through his director’s idea. In the case
of Coppola, his operatic approach turns a gangster story into a
powerful evocation of immigrants (the Corleone family) who are
steeped in family values at the outset but lose their way. Power
corrupts Michael Corleone and he loses everything that he and his
father valued. Under Coppola’s direction, their saga becomes a tale
of America as paradise lost.
    In the case of Woody Allen, his performer/character director’s
idea allows Allen to comment on the importance of love and
relationships to his characters and how, because they are outsiders
(e.g., Jewish or a writer), his characters remain outside the possi-        63
ble realm of enduring love. Consequently, his films capture the
paradigm of contemporary American life—material success and
spiritual ennui.
    Martin Scorsese also is concerned with values in American life
but by using his director’s idea, the search for grace, he deepens the
paradox. In this successful place, America, the divine is always elusive
and the inevitable disappointment leads his characters to violence
and self-destruction. They suffer the fate of living outside grace.
    These dark perceptions of American life have powerfully coun-
tered the popular image of American life that includes success,
material wealth, and power unprecedented in world history. These
three great directors have asked important questions and provided
alternatives to prevailing and popular views.



Three Contemporary Great Directors
Outside America
Great non-American directors have concentrated on particular issues,
with perhaps the most significant being the universal issue of tradition
versus change. Particular filmmakers, such as India’s Sajajit Ray
(“Pather Panchali,” 1955) and Japan’s Yasujiro Ozu (“Early Spring,”
1956), have implicitly advocated tradition, while others, such as
Spain’s Luis Bunuel (“Exterminating Angel,” 1960) and France’s Jean
Luc Godard (“Weekend,” 1968) have aggressively advocated change.
Other filmmakers have represented creative movements—Italy’s


                                                       The Great Director
