to the top tier as the pantheon. This category included D.W. Griffith,
          Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton, Orson Welles, John Ford, Howard
          Hawks, Ernst Lubitsch, F.W. Murnau, and Fritz Lang. Excluded or
          relegated to a lower tier were directors such as Stanley Kubrick,
          George Stevens, Frank Capra, and Preston Sturges. It is not useful
          here to redefine the top tier with regard to great directors in an
          attempt to refute Sarris; rather, I want to focus on the development
          of an operational definition of the great director. We will examine
          the works of three contemporary directors to develop an operational
          definition; however, before doing so we must turn to the issue of
          voice.
56

          Voice

          I dealt extensively with the issue of voice in my book Global
          Scriptwriting (2001, Focal Press). Essentially, voice can be genre spe-
          cific, or the director can use genres that enable his voice. Genres
          such as satire, docudramas, fables, experimental narratives, and
          nonlinear films require a distancing from character and structure so
          the voice is clear rather than embedded in a character. Irony is a
          favorite distancing device. When the voice is genre specific (for
          example, Joseph Mankiewicz in the melodrama “All About Eve”),
          it is usually expressed by the attitudes of the characters and the
          choice of words (dialogue) used to articulate those attitudes. The
          worldly theatricality of Addison DeWitt, the narcissism of Margo
          Channing (and the witty aggression that protects it), and the disin-
          genuousness of Eve Harrington are all qualities that create the voice
          of Mankiewicz. He enjoys the energy and wit of the theater but
          none of the politics of stardom.
              Voice, whatever the genre, is made powerful by the great direc-
          tor. It can reach its apogee in film noir, as in the case of Billy
          Wilder’s “Sunset Boulevard,” or it can join/be influenced by the
          choice of subject matter, as in the case of François Truffaut and his
          films about children—“The 400 Blows” (1966), “The Wild Child”
          (1970), and “Small Change” (1982). On the other hand, it may
          be subsumed by an attitude about being in the world, as in the
          case of Krystof Kieslowski, whose concern was always about exis-
          tence, its quality, its containment, its need for the joining/affiliating


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
