father, a drunk with pretensions, sends Tess off in pursuit of the
       well-to-do relatives. Tess discovers that Alec and his family bought
       the d’Urberville estate and name. Alec seduces Tess and she bears
       his illegitimate child. Angel, the love of her life, deserts her when,
       on their wedding night, she asks forgiveness for her relationship with
       Alec. Although Tess attempts to retain her dignity, in the end she is
       forced to turn to Alec to save her destitute mother and siblings from
       abject poverty. Throughout the story Tess, decent but poor, tries to
       retain her self-respect but the men in her life victimize her until she
       snaps, kills Alec, and is hanged for the murder.
           In “The Pianist,” the plot is the war against the Jews. Although the
226    antagonist has many faces, we can say that the Nazis represent the
       antagonist and for the most part they are indiscriminately destructive
       of the Jews. Szpilman loses everyone as the plot progresses. In the
       end, all he has is his life and his music. He returns to play but he has
       lost so much. He has survived but his victimization has stripped him
       of all those he cared about—his family. In spite of the clarity of the
       main character’s goal, the vigor of the plot, and the scale of the
       antagonist’s goal, the interpretation remains that of a victim rather
       than a hero. We need only look at Spielberg’s interpretation of Oscar
       Schindler in “Schindler’s List” (1993) to highlight differences in the
       presentation of the main characters in the two films. Szpilman is nei-
       ther a hero nor a romantic character, as Schindler is depicted; he is
       simply a human stripped down to the status of animal but trying to
       retain a shred of humanity—in short, a survivor.
           A second feature of Polanski’s text interpretation is the powerful
       sense of environment in his work—New York in “Rosemary’s Baby,”
       Los Angeles in “Chinatown,” rural England during the Industrial
       Revolution in “Tess,” and Warsaw, the cultural and urban center of
       Poland, in “The Pianist.” Polanski’s environments differ from those
       of John Ford in that Ford’s environments do not test the characters
       and consequently elevate them. His work also differs from that of
       George Stevens in that Stevens’ environments present a spiritual
       template for his characters. The environments in Polanski’s films
       are neutral; they suggest that help should be available but none is.
       In this sense, the beauty of Polanski’s environments is ironic
       because they offer little or no solace to his characters; they offer no
       protection from victimization. Cosmopolitan New York only serves
       to mask the primitiveness of the struggle between the forces of good


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
