Introduction

Sergei Eisenstein, together with his colleagues Vassili Pudovkin, Dziga
Vertov, and Alexander Dovshenko, revolutionized film directing.
Building on the work of D.W. Griffith, each set out on a different path
for creating films, but each did so out of a conviction that the power of
film should be harnessed for a public purpose—to change society.
Each of these directors had a different aesthetic. Pudovkin embraced
the theatrical, Vertov embraced the documentary in its most orthodox
form, and Dovshenko embraced the poetic. To say that Eisenstein saw
film as architecture or as graphic design or as a new malleable
medium arising out of literature is too limiting. Eisenstein, like              123
Griffith before him, explored the medium of film and contributed
new ideas about film. In addition to Griffith, Eisenstein’s ideas about
film made him a key explorer of the medium. His ideas about editing
remain important (see S. Eisenstein, Film Form, Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1977; The Film Sense, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975).
And his influence on directors such as Sam Peckinpah and Oliver
Stone confirms his continued relevance to directing. For Eisenstein,
editing is the core creative strategy, and his director’s idea is articulated
in those ideas about editing. For Eisenstein, history is conflict, the
inevitable dialectic of one force fighting another. The clash of images
has to be articulated and given a human face.



Text Interpretation

Eisenstein directed fewer than ten films from 1925 to 1945. When he
fell out of favor, he would teach and write. At the invitation of
Charlie Chaplin, he tried Hollywood in the early 1930s and devel-
oped a script for Theodore Dreiser’s novel An American Tragedy at
Paramount. He also directed a film for Sinclair Lewis in Mexico,
but his North American interlude was not successful. Eisenstein is
best known for his films “Potemkin” (1925), “Alexander Nevsky”
(1938), and “Ivan the Terrible” (Part I, 1943; Part II, 1946).
    Turning more specifically to Eisenstein’s director’s idea,
although Eisenstein considered editing ideas to be the most power-
ful manifestation of that idea, he believed that text interpretation


                               Sergei Eisenstein: The Historical Dialectic
