against Rome. Stories that require a sense of enclosure or entrap-
ment (e.g., film noir such as Billy Wilder’s “Double Indemnity”)
will use high camera placements as often as possible. The third
option is the eye-line camera placement. This is the most natural
and democratic of camera placements. It is also the camera
placement most often used by directors. Power implications are
not the only rationale for camera placements. Many times a cam-
era will be placed in a particular position to allow a longer take
while following the action. Although there is a lesser dramatic
benefit to such placements, the economic benefit of shooting the
film within budget expectations can more than compensate for
the dramatic limitations of the shot.                                     91


Camera Movement

Generally speaking, camera movement is one of the most exciting
choices available to the director. Movement is dynamic and ener-
gizing, but the choices the director makes can make the resulting
energy more purposeful, or at least they should. The most signifi-
cant choice the director faces is whether the movement should be
stabilized by putting the camera on a tripod or whether the obvious
movement of a handheld camera is preferable. If a sense of stability
is needed, a tripod-mounted camera is preferable. If a sense of
immediacy, of being there is crucial, then the handheld camera can
be used to provide a sensation of watching news footage by virtue of
its slight to moderate tremor. For example, footage of a bomb going
off shot with a handheld camera will capture the photographer’s
sudden jerk in response to the bomb and will serve to place the
audience closer to the action.
    A variation of the handheld shot is the use of a steadicam (a
gyroscopic offset to smooth out the jiggle) to record the shot. The
steadicam glide made famous in walking shots in Brian De Palma’s
“The Bonfire of the Vanities” and Martin Scorsese’s “Goodfellas”
seem elegant and artificial, and they move us away from the
immediacy of the handheld shot, providing elegance and style over
dramatic gravitas.
    One additional point should be made about the handheld shot.
Certain film movements, such as Cinéma Vérité, New Wave, and


                                                             The Camera
