dies without achieving it. Waco, who kills him, is a romantic
psychopath—a man who enjoys betraying others. All of these char-
acters are complex and make the experience of “Winchester ’73”
one of witnessing absolute behavior in a world of considerable
moral ambiguity. They make the story more complex, and their
development as characters does not seem to slow down the
busy plot.
    Regarding the movie’s plot deployment (pursuit of the
Winchester ’73) and its relationship to the character layer of the
story, the plot was designed to mask the deeper character layer, par-
ticularly the protagonist–antagonist relationship. Initially, the plot
highlights the intense rivalry between Lyn McAdam and Dutch                 51
Henry Brown. Initially, we believe the rivalry has something to do
with a past grievance, but eventually it is revealed that Dutch Henry
killed Lyn’s father. Only late in the story do we learn they are broth-
ers. Each revelation changes the story. In Act I, the story seems to
be one of two rivals fighting to prove who is the top shot. In Act II,
it becomes a revenge story. And, in Act III, the revelation that they
are brothers changes the story yet again to one of fratricide. In a
sense, the pursuit of the rifle (the plot) masks what the story is really
about, but what the story is about keeps changing as the story
unfolds. To put it another way, Mann’s treatment of the story in
“Winchester ’73” yields considerable subtext and surprise. Thus,
another mark of the good director is layered storytelling.
    This brings us to Mann’s point of view in the story. Here we
reach an interesting point. Andrew Sarris viewed Mann as the ulti-
mate craftsman or technician. Putting it another way, Mann did not
have a personal voice, and he himself claimed to be a director for
hire. Other directors have been damned with the same faint praise:
Fred Zinnemann (“High Noon,” “Day of the Jackal”), William
Wyler (“Best Years of Our Lives,” “Roman Holiday”), and Carol
Reed (“The Third Man,” “Odd Man Out”). I would include all of
these directors in the category of good directors. I would like to sug-
gest that these filmmakers excelled in the visualizations of their
films, and each showed great strength in deploying an intricate mix
of plot and character in a manner that raised the bar for the story in
general. In the case of both Wyler and Reed, their use of the deep
focus frame is as powerful as the work of Orson Welles in “Citizen
Kane.” Both Wyler’s “Little Foxes” and Reed’s “The Third Man” are


                                                        The Good Director
