Interviews). Coming as he did from a family of actors, Stevens
was both comfortable and confident with actors. Stevens had
a number of expectations regarding the performances in his films.
He expected above all an emotional realism in the performances,
and he understood that emotional realism could come from orches-
trating the performances around the main character, somewhat
akin to developing a better understanding of a person by meeting
his family. Looking at Alice Adams, for example, she is energetic but
nervous about her station in life, and certainly she deserves better.
Looking at her family, we can see that Alice’s mother is ambitious
to the point of desperation. She badgers her husband constantly to
do better. The father, on the other hand, is so beaten down by the           155
pressures of his wife that he is in his pajamas, either sick or in
retreat, for half of the film. Alice’s brother is her opposite; he accepts
and revels in his low class and caste. Alice and her mother, father,
and brother create an emotional realism that is readily recognizable.
We see the same qualities in George Eastman’s surviving mother in
“A Place in the Sun” and the families in “Giant.”
    The second quality Stevens cultivates in his main characters is
a depth of desire that is understandable and sympathetic. We do
understand George Eastman’s desire to advance. He does not want
the circumscribed life of his mother and father. He wants more
from life. So, too, does Sergeant Cutter in “Gunga Din.” As does
Alice Adams. As does Connie Mulligan.
    Creating further sympathy for these characters are the antago-
nists. For Alice Adams and George Eastman, their antagonist is the
snobbery of society. For Sergeant Cutter, it is the British class sys-
tem. The desires of the main characters are made more under-
standable because all of these characters are victims of social values
that have protected the power structure in society and penalized the
“have nots” (our main characters).
    Finally, Stevens has an exceptional sense of the character arc.
In his films, his characters are tested by the plot and opposing
characters, and they change; they are transformed. George Eastman
is penalized by society for his desire in “A Place in the Sun.” Jordan
Benedict is changed from a racist Texan to a defender of differences
in race in “Giant.” This transformation is due to the continual
pressure of his wife, Leslie, and the birth of a child to Jordie, his son,
and his Hispanic wife. Connie Mulligan is transformed from a


    George Stevens: The American Character—Desire and Conscience
