and life events supports the operatic feeling. Stylistically, Coppola
takes a very deliberate, slow approach to all of these set pieces. The
result is the antithesis of realism, a theatricality I suggest is more opera
than film.
    The “film as opera” director’s idea is equally at play in
“Apocalypse Now.” War films tend to present realistically, with a
focus on the main character’s survival. Coppola’s operatic approach
posits the war as madness, and the main character from the outset
struggles to hold onto his sanity. The soldiers’ progression up the
river to deliver an assassin to kill the rogue officer, Kurtz, approxi-
mates a series of set pieces on the river Styx. By the time we reach
Kurtz’s camp, the feeling is that we are in hell, and by the time the          59
main character obeys his order to kill Kurtz we fully believe he may
be a good soldier but is madder than a bat in hell. He has accom-
plished his mission but lost his mind. This is Coppola’s view of the
effect of the war in Vietnam on America. By using an operatic direc-
tor’s idea he has made even more extreme the narrative events of
“Apocalypse Now” and created a film experience that functions as
a war film on a narrative level but is transformed into an internal-
ized psychodrama commenting on that war. Coppola’s voice is loud
and clear.
    Woody Allen’s director’s idea is equally as powerful and
enhances the film’s voice just as it did for Francis Ford Coppola.
Allen’s director’s idea is to be both a performer (stand-up comic)
and a character in his films. When he is acting as stand-up comic,
he speaks directly to the audience, breaking down the wall between
the film’s character and its audience. When he assumes the role of
a character in the film, he remains in character and relies on the
narrative strategies to invite the audience to identify and empathize
with his character. In brief, Woody Allen’s director’s idea is as a
writer/performer/director to step out of the film from time to time to
comment on the ongoing narrative. In this sense, he is closer to the
Marx Brothers as a comic persona/performer than he is to Charlie
Chaplin, Buster Keaton, or Jerry Lewis.
    Woody Allen is also profoundly influenced by the great filmmakers
Ingmar Bergman and Federico Fellini. The consequence is a series of
homages such as “September” (1987) and “Stardust Memories” (1980),
and their influence can also be seen less directly in most of Allen’s
work, such as “Crimes and Misdemeanors” (1989) and “Broadway


                                                          The Great Director
