are and always will be alone. How they cope with this state and the
       nature of their existence in the condition of being alone comprise
       Polanski’s director’s idea.
           To depict and emotionalize such a bleak state, Polanski must
       take us deep into the core of his main characters. To do so he uses
       a set of strategies that allow the audience to literally be with his char-
       acter. These strategies include an orthodox almost austere approach
       to narrative. As with Elia Kazan, he will take an almost documen-
       tary approach to the presentation of the world around the character.
       To depict the inner life of the character, however, he relies on point
       of view rather than on an expressionist style. He relies on that point
220    of view to the exclusion of objective or alternative views, including
       his own. The result is an obsessive subjective perspective in a
       Polanski film. That point of view is that of the main character.
           Another characteristic of the Polanski world is that specific
       details puncture the subjective world view of the character and
       remind the audience that circumstances have changed, time has
       passed—a rotting potato in “Repulsion” and a sudden execution in
       “The Pianist” to illustrate that the circumstances of the Jews in
       Warsaw have worsened.
           Finally, Polanski, like Billy Wilder and Ernst Lubitsch before
       him, is a genre filmmaker of the classic sort. Although his contem-
       poraries, such as Volker Schlondorff and Krystof Kieslowski, have
       opted for genres of voice, the moral fable, and the satire, Polanski
       has been far more classical, preferring to use film noir, horror films,
       or war films and their traditions of mixing plot and character layers
       in accord with the particular genre convention. The result is less
       adaptation of a genre. When Polanski has attempted to modify the
       genre in tone or plot, as in “Fearless Vampire Killers” (1968) or “The
       Ninth Gate” (2000), his films have been far less effective. The
       reverse is also true. When Polanski has made classic horror films
       (“Repulsion” and “Rosemary’s Baby”), classic film noir
       (“Chinatown”), classic melodrama (“Tess”), and classic war films
       (“The Pianist”), he has created a number of timeless classics that
       also carry his director’s idea. In this chapter, we will focus on
       excerpts from the following films: “Rosemary’s Baby,” “Chinatown,”
       “Tess,” and “The Pianist.” In each of these films, I have tried to
       choose the main character’s moment of abandonment or absolute
       aloneness.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
