range demands an “anti-realism” that is so stylized that it can
           encompass enormous swings in behavior and performance style.
           The character of Ivan requires a larger than life performance, and
           Cherkassov provides it. Because Eisenstein’s director’s idea is all
           about conflict (peace and war; outer appearances and inner feel-
           ings), Cherkassov’s performance had to reinforce these conflicts.


           Directing the Camera

           To understand how to harness conflict, we turn now to how
128        Eisenstein used the camera to portray conflict. There are numerous
           dimensions to Eisenstein’s visual skill as a director. To understand
           his work as a director we must look at the compositional qualities of
           his films and the editing of his films. Because Eisenstein’s contribu-
           tions to the art of editing are so great, we will discuss how the edit-
           ing contributed to his director’s idea after we look at his visual style.
               In order to frame an understanding of Eisenstein’s visual style, we
           must first examine how it contributes to the historical dialectic of oppo-
           site forces in conflict. These ideas require an imagery that suggests dif-
           ferent dimensions of power and conflict. We begin with the land and
           how Eisenstein’s presentation of the land created a sense of scale that
           is important and harnessed a beauty worth fighting and dying for.
               Eisenstein uses powerful images of the beauty of the sea and
           the seaport of Odessa in “Potemkin.” These images imply a certain
           tranquility, a welcome quality for sailors and the civilian population.
           The land is even more powerfully evoked in “Alexander Nevsky,”
           where the rural imagery is of wheat fields, with shipmasts in the
           foreground and the bountiful sea in the background. In all the rural
           images, the sky is endless and dominates and dwarfs humans. In
           “Alexander Nevsky,” the earth is bountiful and beautiful, mother to
           all men. The urban images are different. Bustling and brimming
           with religious iconography, the city represents physical protection
           rather than spiritual sustenance for its inhabitants. Cities are power
           centers important to Russia but also to its enemies. That sense of
           power and potential protection is how Eisenstein chose to present
           the city in “Alexander Nevsky.” The land is presented differently in
           “Ivan the Terrible.” The rural and urban areas are never entities
           unto themselves. They exist but only as an extension of Ivan and his


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
