to be immersed in the action as it unfolds, and the audience will be
           more likely to be immersed along with the actor.
              Objective, intention, image, fact, sense of belief, physical life,
           specifics, and listening will all mechanically contribute to the
           actor’s creation of a character. Judith Weston has suggested what the
           director should understand about the actor from the actor’s point of
           view. We now turn to David Mamet, who speaks to the issue from
           the director’s point of view.
              A playwright and a man of the theater, Mamet came late to film
           work. He was the screenwriter for Sidney Lumet’s “The Verdict”
           and Brian De Palma’s “The Untouchables,” both lauded screen-
118        plays. Mamet turned to directing with “Things Change” and
           “Homicide” and has directed a film every two years, with each one
           becoming increasingly plot oriented, such as “Heist” and “Spartan.”
              In a sense Mamet offers a position on directing intentionally
           opposite that of an acting coach such as Judith Weston. Even an
           actor’s director such as Elia Kazan overinvests directing in the
           actor’s performance, according to Mamet (On Directing Film).
           Mamet takes the position championed by Sergei Eisenstein and V.
           Pudovkin: Eisenstein’s “method has nothing to do with following
           the protagonist around but rather is a succession of images juxta-
           posed so that the contrast between these images moves the story
           forward in the mind of the audience” (On Directing Film, p. 2). The
           emphasis then is on shot selection and organization. Mamet equates
           the conversation with the cinematographer regarding where to
           place the camera (technical) with the conversation with the actor
           about what the actor should do (technical). Mamet downplays or
           outright dismisses conversations about motivation. Mamet elabo-
           rates this idea later in his book. Using a Stanislavsky anecdote about
           navigation on the challenging Volga River, Mamet suggests:

              “How is it that given the many, many ways one might direct
              a movie, one might always be able with economy, and perhaps
              a certain amount of grace, to tell the story? The answer is:
              ‘Stick to the channel; it’s marked’ (sailing reference). The
              channel is the super objective of the hero and the marker
              buoys are the small objectives of each scene and the smaller
              objectives of each beat, and the smallest unit of all, which is
              the shot” (On Directing Film, pp. 103–104).


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
