debunking adults coping with adult life is an utterly romantic one
       that recurs throughout Truffaut’s work. Although Truffaut occasion-
       ally explored the dark side of this romantic sensibility, such as in
       “The Story of Adele H” and “Confidentially Yours,” for the most part
       he embraced romance and its relationship to the child in all of us.


       Directing the Actor

       Few filmmakers cast so strongly for type—the look of the actor is key
       to the role and in turn to that actor’s performance. Although Truffaut
212    often worked with very talented actors such as Oscar Werner and
       Jean Moreau, more often he would choose actors for their looks.
       Françoise Dorleac, Catherine Deneuve, Natalie Baye, and Fannie
       Ardant were among his favorites. If you read the Truffaut biography
       by Antoine De Baecque and Serge Toubiana (Truffaut, Knopf, 1999),
       you will discover that Truffaut either had long-lasting affairs or mar-
       ried his leading ladies. Life and filmmaking merged.
           And what of his alter ego, Jean-Pierre Léaud, who appeared in at
       least a half dozen films with Truffaut? Léaud had a particular look of
       a boy-man and an energetic, agitated style of performance. One has
       the impression that he always played himself. Nevertheless, Léaud is
       so identified with the Antoine Doinel character and the Doinel char-
       acter is so identified with Truffaut that the issue of performance is not
       an issue. It is as if Truffaut simply asked Léaud to appear. At times,
       Léaud seems to deliver lines as if he is reading the text or improvis-
       ing. He would appear to be a natural non-actor, although his petulant
       performance as Alphonse in “Day for Night” is convincing.
           In “Day for Night,” we can see how Truffaut cast for type; how-
       ever, with regard to the actresses in his films the sense of perfor-
       mance is more powerful. Dorothea as Sabine, Dani as Liliane,
       Claude Jade as Christine—all of these actresses gave a more
       nuanced performance, energetic and goal directed. When we add
       the star performances of Dorleac, Deneuve, and Moreau, we have
       a very different style of performance—more filled with feeling.
       Each of these women also injected into their performances a sly
       sensuality utterly absent from the performance of Jean-Pierre
       Léaud. Perhaps the most we can say is that the male character actors
       such as Michel Lonsdale as the hated client in “Stolen Kisses” or


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
