Introduction

Many theories of modern history were built on the model that as
man works his way up from the animal world progress is made. That
progress is an interpretation of human history which would be
unmistakable if a historian based the interpretation on the work of
Stanley Kubrick, who explored the darkness of modern life. That
darkness—with regard to human frailty or something more sinister—
is consistent whether Kubrick is exploring the future (“2001: A Space
Odyssey,” 1968), the past (“Barry Lyndon,” 1975), or the present
(“Eyes Wide Shut,” 2000).
    Although Kubrick made few films in a career that spanned                 233
almost 50 years, each of those films has had an enduring impact.
Devalued in the Andrew Sarris hierarchy (see Sarris’ The American
Cinema: Strained Seriousness, University of Chicago Press, 1968,
pp. 195–196), Kubrick’s reputation among filmmakers and film
enthusiasts has grown to the point where he today occupies a kind
of exclusive, Olympian height reserved only for the gods of film-
making, whomever they may be. As I mentioned early in the book,
my goal is not so much to defend filmmakers as to try to understand
what makes their work compelling and influential for the new
generation of filmmakers.
    In his career, Kubrick most often devoted himself to films about
war, such as “Paths of Glory” (1956), “Dr. Strangelove” (1964), and
“Full Metal Jacket” (1987); fables about human nature, such as
“Lolita” (1962), “A Clockwork Orange” (1972), and “Eyes Wide
Shut”; and genre films—crime films such as “The Killing” (1956),
horror films such as “The Shining” (1979), science fiction films
such as “2001: A Space Odyssey,” and epics such as “Spartacus”
(1960) and “Barry Lyndon.” What all these films have in common,
beyond their ambition, is a focus on the dark side of human nature.
To cope with that darkness Kubrick used humor. Irony infuses
“Dr. Strangelove,” “A Clockwork Orange,” “2001: A Space Odyssey,”
and “Lolita.” And what is certain is that a character will lose a
pound of flesh in the course of a Kubrick narrative. That pound of
flesh may be spiritual or it may be physical. What is certain is the loss.
    In order to articulate this loss Kubrick tended to focus on a par-
ticular human failing in each of his films. Before we examine those
failings, what needs to be said is that there are particular bold, filmic

                           Stanley Kubrick: The Darkness of Modern Life
