come together. Think of Yuri and Lara in David Lean’s “Doctor
       Zhivago” and the outlaw gang known as the Wild Bunch and the
       vigilantes who are hunting them down in Sam Peckinpah’s “The
       Wild Bunch.” To provide some hint that these disparate characters
       will come together, some directors use screen direction and others
       use specific actions. Whatever the strategy adopted, the director
       must have specific ideas regarding how the audience should feel
       about the two parties’ eventually meeting. Clearly, we want Yuri and
       Lara to meet, as they are soul mates who represent a romantic ideal
       in a time and place that had no tolerance for love; however, the feel-
       ings evoked with regard to the Wild Bunch and their pursuers are
100    different. Tension and the potential violence that will ensue are the
       directorial motifs for the Wild Bunch and the vigilantes. Peckinpah
       nevertheless imbued the Wild Bunch with a sense of friendship
       absent from the vigilantes. In this sense, he created nobles among
       the savages, relegating the law-supported vigilantes to savages, an
       ethos appropriate to the deadly romanticism that roams through
       “The Wild Bunch.”

       Emotional Guidelines
       The edit of a film is the emotional guideline of a film. A director
       forgets this at his peril. The director must encourage modulated
       performances and provide the juxtapositions and compositions
       necessary to create the context for how the audience should feel.
       Ridley Scott in “Gladiator” particularly understood this require-
       ment. Maximus may be the general of all the Roman legions but he
       is also a husband and a father, roles critical to his identity. Those
       roles motivate his actions throughout the film, even his actions to
       kill Commodus, his emperor.

       Tone
       The tone of a film is critical to the emotional character and credi-
       bility just mentioned. Tone can be genre specific or it can challenge
       the genre. Whichever stance, tone is all about specific images. The
       baptism in the Coen brothers’ “O Brother, Where Art Thou” and
       the shattering of glass in Volker Schlondorff’s “The Tin Drum” both
       go the heart of the narrative—the religiosity of the American
       character in the Coen brothers’ film and the arch response of Oscar,
       the main character, to the rise of Nazism in Schlondorff’s film (his


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
