Although I had not yet navigated the emotional depths of, for exam-
      ple, Charlie Chaplin, I felt certain that doing so lay just ahead.
          The joy of directing has never left me, but in short order it was
      joined by a drive to write, and nothing proved more pleasurable
      than editing my own work. Indeed, the process of discovery I expe-
      rienced in the editing process is quite unmatched in all of my film
      experiences. I began to teach and quite enjoyed that, also. I have
      never thought of myself as pollyannaish. I simply enjoy every aspect
      of the form. It is all about telling a story, about having—and giving
      to the audience—a thrilling experience. This has not changed, even
      after thousands of films viewed and even more thousands of stu-
10    dents taught. In the past 15 years of my career, I have been writing
      books about scriptwriting, editing, and production.
          In 1988, an editor at Focal Press, Karen Speerstra, asked me to eval-
      uate a book proposal on directing. I did so, and in the course of that
      evaluation I shared with her that the best directing book I ever encoun-
      tered was Karel Reisz’s The Technique of Film Editing. First written in
      the early 1950s, that book was for me the bible of directing, and I said
      as much to Karen. Her response was to ask me if I wanted to write the
      third update of the Reisz book. Of course I did, but it did not come to
      pass. What did result is what I call the cousin of the Reisz book, my
      1993 book, The Technique of Film and Video Editing. That book, now
      in its third edition, has given me the opportunity to flesh out Reisz’s
      subtextual idea: What do directors need to know about shots to make
      a strong film? Much has changed—styles (e.g., MTV), pacing, types of
      documentaries, elaborate nonlinear films—but the ideas of Griffith
      and Vertov and Eisenstein and Pudovkin remain the fundamentals for
      the shot organization and selection that create powerful film experi-
      ences. And those ideas are at the core of the Reisz book.
          Flash forward to 2003. I am teaching a workshop in Amsterdam
      on the history of editing. Attending are working editors and produc-
      ers. To a person, the attendees express their regret that directors have
      not come to the workshop. They should be your audience, I am told
      again and again. Thus, the idea for this book took form.
          I would like to end this chapter with the following ten ideas
      about directing that I would like to share with the reader:

           1. Writing, directing, and editing are all about storytelling. The
              writer uses words, the director uses the camera and the


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
