script does not follow genre expectations, do the changes make the
script better, fresher, and stronger . . . or the opposite?
    Now that you have read the script a second time and taken copious
notes, a third reading is necessary to explore dimensions of the script
that could yield a director’s idea.


Moving Toward Interpretation

Think of this round as the application of text interpretation. A useful
approach here is to speculate about the story’s potential in the
following dimensions:                                                       333

   • Existential
   • Psychological
   • Sociological
   • Political

Each dimension spins the story differently. Let’s look at a film such
as “Lost in Translation.” On a political level we could say the film
has a Japanese–American dimension. Films such as Billy Wilder’s
“One Two Three” put politics and political differences right up
front, but in “Lost in Translation” Sofia Coppola does not seem that
interested in the political dimensions of a story. What about the
sociological dimension of “Lost in Translation”? Is there a class or
gender issue at play here? Is there a hierarchy of groups, one over
another? Not really. A sociological reading was not important to
Sofia Coppola in this film. What about the psychological dimen-
sion of “Lost in Translation”? Is this essentially a story of unhappi-
ness or some other character issue? Can the unhappiness of the two
main characters be defined in terms of a cause and a cure? Not
really. Let’s look at the existential dimension, then. Both main char-
acters, the actor and the young photographer’s wife, seem to have
full lives but are essentially alone. Conversations with their spouses
alert us to how alone they feel in their significant relationships.
Being in a strange foreign culture with distinctive social mores
does not resolve the aloneness of these two characters. Only the
friendship each offers the other moves each of these characters away
from being absolutely alone. Sofia Coppola has chosen to focus on


                                    Appendix: Finding the Director’s Idea
