Maria Tura. In “The Shop Around the Corner,” idealism and the
need for idealism fuels the relationship of Klara and Alfred. Finally,
in “Ninotchka” the joy of romance fuels the relationship of Leon
and Ninotchka and helps each overcome their political differences.
    To highlight the subtext, the performances are keyed toward
opposites attracting. Leon is portrayed as a hedonist, so light he
might just float away, and Ninotchka is portrayed as serious and
somber, weighed down by her heaviness. It is the joy of finding each
other that transforms Leon into a man who can make and honor
commitments and Ninotchka into a woman who can laugh and
take pleasure in the small things, such as a hat or a Moscow dinner
party with her friends, all of whom have been banished from where           323
their hearts are—Paris. The performers had to be able to capture the
pleasure and the pain, the seriousness and the lightness. And this is
precisely where Lubitsch brought the performances. In each case,
they are the focus of his text interpretations.
    Billy Wilder also focused on the romantic subtext in his films.
Lost hope is the subtext of “Double Indemnity.” Lost dreams are the
subtext of “The Lost Weekend.” Lost ambition is the subtext of
“Sunset Boulevard.” Lost moral values are the subtext of “The
Apartment.” Using text interpretation, Wilder amplified hope and
its destruction in “Double Indemnity,” in which a single charac-
ter—the woman of Walter Neff’s dreams, Phyllis Dietrichson—was
responsible for both. In a sense, two women represent Joe Gillis’
relationship with ambition in “Sunset Boulevard.” Norma
Desmond represents the collapse of Joe’s ambition for himself; with
her, he is a kept man. With Betty, the story analyst, Joe regains the
sense that he may be a good writer. His relationship with her repre-
sents the hope that he might regain that ambition.
    Critical to the performances of the actors is that we need to see
their self-contempt for losing their ambition and we need to see the
desire, the hope, that the ambition can live again. This requires a
labile performance swinging from cynicism to anticipation to love.
William Holden’s performance as Joe Gillis does not disappoint,
nor do the other actors in Wilder’s films. Both Ray Milland in “The
Lost Weekend” and Jack Lemmon in “The Apartment” were recog-
nized with Oscars for their acting. Portraying the swings between
moral confusion and clarity in no small part contributed to Jack
Lemmon’s performance in “The Apartment.” Performance together


                                                               Conclusion
