The more objective camera movement following the adolescent
           Antoine down to the sea in “The 400 Blows” is quite lyrical because
           of the length of the shots. Here, the moving shots flow one into the
           other to create a lengthy sequence. Before running away from the
           soccer match there was a scene with Antoine’s mother on a visitor’s
           day, but the message in that scene was accusatory and harsh. Antoine
           will be sent to a stricter reformatory, and his stepfather has totally
           rejected him, as has the mother apparently. It is a scene of profound
           abandonment. The lyrical moving shots of Antoine running to the
           sea beautifully illustrate his act of bravado, of rebellion against
           authority, and the lyricism offsets the pain we associate with the pre-
214        vious scene. Antoine seems to be reclaiming the energy of being free.
               In the opening scene of “The 400 Blows,” the moving camera is
           once again used differently. Here, the camera is restless; first it is mov-
           ing, trying to find out what is happening in the classroom. The rest-
           less camera follows the pinup from student to student until it lands on
           Antoine’s desk. At that point he is challenged by the teacher and pun-
           ished. The camera continues to move about the classroom and later
           moves outside during recess. Quite what the camera is looking for we
           do not know, but it continues to move in the classroom as Antoine is
           ordered to clean the board of the message he scribbled during recess.
           My association with this probing camera is that it introduces unpre-
           dictability and surprise into an otherwise long take. Rather than quick
           cutting or using cutaways, Truffaut relied on this style of camera
           movement to create tension in the scene.
               Another characteristic of Truffaut’s approach to visualization is
           that he seems to prefer long and mid shots over the close shot.
           Truffaut uses few close-ups; consequently, his scene construction
           tends to use fewer shots, longer takes, and a more literary approach
           to the ordering of scenes. I have already discussed the hotel scene in
           “Stolen Kisses” where we see Antoine lose his first job. Another
           example would be the train scene in “Love on the Run.” We know
           Antoine and Colette are both at the train station because a pan from
           one to the other establishes their presence; we also know that they
           have not seen each other. In this way, a parallel action sequence fol-
           lows first Antoine and his son and then Colette. We guess that they
           will eventually meet, and they do, but Truffaut makes what happens
           before they do more compelling by relying on cutaways to the past.
           Those cutaways are connected by the book Colette is reading,


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
