inhumanity, and the worthiness of using power to crush such injustice.
       In both sequences, creating emotional arousal and outrage were his
       goals. The Odessa Steppes sequence introduces the future victims, the
       innocents who are enjoying life when the Cossacks attack. The
       grandmother, the intellectual, the granddaughter, the peasant mother
       and her son, and later the well-to-do mother with her baby carriage are
       all introduced via mid shots. Although each of these characters later
       becomes a victim, Eisenstein particularly focused on the deaths of the
       mothers and their children. Detailed in close-up are the shooting of
       the ebullient son, the peasant mother’s shock, her raising the boy’s
       body and appealing to the soldiers to stop, her death, the shooting of
132    the other mother, the command, the baby carriage’s descent down the
       steps, the baby, the Cossack raising his sword, and the killing. The two
       mothers are the ultimate victims, and watching their efforts to save
       their children is the equivalent of seeing our future (children) being
       stomped out; these scenes are shocking and overwhelming.
           Eisenstein used faceless rows of boots and rifles marching
       inexorably toward the victims to portray this march to death. There
       are no humanizing close-ups of the soldiers (except the Cossack
       who kills the baby). The inhuman stamps out the human. Cutting
       between victims and victimizers, Eisenstein uses screen direction
       (left to right for the Cossacks, right to left for the mothers) to illus-
       trate the conflict. Rhythmic montages or other visuals that oppose
       each other further deepen the sense of conflict and victimization.
           The Pskov massacre sequence in “Alexander Nevsky” is far more
       subtle. Here, screen direction also plays a role—one direction for
       victimizers, the other for the victims. Eisenstein also used the wide-
       angle shot more frequently, with victims in the foreground and vic-
       timizers in the background. In this sequence, Eisenstein relied less
       on pace to whip up emotion and more on visual juxtapositions—the
       forces of good (the victims) versus the forces of evil. The camera is
       placed closer to the Russian victims and hovers farther back from
       the Teutonic knights. When the victimization reaches its peak—the
       burning of the children and the hanging of a recalcitrant peasant
       leader—the shots are long shots and objective. The content did not
       require additional editing techniques such as pace and close-up.
           Turning to the coronation sequence in “Ivan the Terrible, Part I,”
       Eisenstein’s goal was again not to repeat himself. There is a good deal
       of conflict and power, but there is also hope. Ivan is crowned as czar,


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
