plot to isolate the main characters, in short to victimize the main
characters. To understand how the director’s idea operates in
Polanski’s case, we need to explore for a moment the audience’s
relationship with his main characters and how a director can create
empathy or identification with the main characters.
   To encourage the audience to identify with the main characters,
the micro strategies must be character focused and the macro strate-
gies structural. The micro strategies have to do with the nature of
the characters. Whether they are charismatic or flawed, there is an
energy that emanates from the characters that engages the audi-
ence. Another strategy writers use is a private moment that reveals
the true character. This strategy is appealing because the audience        225
feels privileged when characters reveal themselves to them. The
macro strategies essentially use plot and antagonists to victimize the
main character. None of us likes to be victimized, and we hope that
the character can avoid victimization. The strategy of victimizing
the main character is the strategy Polanski uses. His characters do
not manage to avoid victimization; instead, they are victimized by
both the antagonist and the plot. Let’s see how this works.
   In “Rosemary’s Baby,” the plot is to have a normal woman bear
the Devil’s baby. Rosemary’s goal is to have a baby, but the Castevets
and her own husband Guy stand against her. They succeed in vic-
timizing Rosemary, and in the end she bears the Devil’s baby.
   In “Chinatown,” Jake Gittes’ goal is to do his job effectively. The
plot, to divert water from the city to the Valley and to profit from the
appreciation of property values in the Valley, requires the death of
anyone who is a barrier. The most prominent killing is that of Hollis
Mulwray, and because Gittes has been investigating Mulwray for
marital indiscretion, Gittes is pre-empted in his actions against
Mulwray. He is out of the loop, used by bigger players with bigger
goals than previous marital infidelity. He feels betrayed and doesn’t
understand why. As Gittes investigates the murder of Mulwray he
bumps up against the why of it, the plot. He also begins a relationship
with Mrs. Mulwray. The plot and this relationship bring Gittes up
against the antagonist Noah Cross, Mrs. Mulwray’s father. He loses
Mrs. Mulwray, and Cross gets away with his scheme and his child by
his daughter. Gittes is a victim of the plot and of the antagonist.
   Tess d’Urberville is a victim of all three principal men in the
story and ultimately is hanged for striking back at one of them. Her


                             Roman Polanski: The Aloneness of Existence
