values as its target. At times, the irony can be quite funny, particu-
           larly when Kubrick used comic actors, such as he did with Peter
           Sellers as Claire Quilty in “Lolita” and in such secondary roles as
           Dr. Strangelove in “Dr. Strangelove.” It works less well when he
           used literal actors such as Tom Cruise in “Eyes Wide Shut.”
           Nevertheless, an ironic tone is very important in a Kubrick film. It
           promotes distance from character and helps create a metaphorical
           space for Kubrick’s views on progress, character, and modern life.


           Directing the Actor
242
           Kubrick relied a great deal on his casting decisions. Because he
           was dealing with characters ranging from outright unlikable to
           conflicted, his actors had to compensate by generating a certain
           energy within their roles; for example, Malcolm McDowell in
           “A Clockwork Orange” and Matthew Modine in “Full Metal Jacket”
           were capable of expressing rage in their roles. Another type of cast-
           ing used by Kubrick was a “pretty boy” look that implied sexual
           ambiguity or a reliance on sex as the first line of personal endeavor,
           such as the casting of Ryan O’Neal in “Barry Lyndon” and Tom
           Cruise in “Eyes Wide Shut.” In either case, the star persona fed
           the casting choice. A third dimension of Kubrick’s casting was his
           casting of the male predator, where a combination of aggression
           and sexuality was necessary for the actor taking on such a role. Jack
           Nicholson in “The Shining” and Sterling Hayden in “The Killing”
           and “Dr. Strangelove” are representative of this aspect of Kubrick’s
           casting. The look of the actor was another important dimension of
           Kubrick’s films; for example, Keir Dullea looks perfect as the astro-
           naut in “2001: A Space Odyssey.”
              Kubrick required his actors to operate within a very narrow range.
           Dullea played an astronaut who was the modern product of tech-
           nology, so his emotional range was very limited. He seems to proceed
           without feeling, almost automatically, as if he were a robot. This nar-
           row emotional range produces a lack of empathy or charm in his per-
           formance. Each actor in a Kubrick film uses a single extreme
           behavioral quality to drive the performance. Malcolm McDowell in
           “A Clockwork Orange” is always operating with aggression. James
           Mason in “Lolita” is always operating out of his desire. Ryan O’Neal


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
