seeks Alice’s company as a lonely man rather than as an opportunist
looking for easy sex. Important here is the antagonist role of the rich
peers and their families who reject Alice Adams and George
Eastman.
    In “Giant,” desire is very much present in the two main
characters—Jordan Benedict and Jett Rink (James Dean). Jordan is
rich and firmly entrenched in the power of his position and status.
His desire is to maintain possession of that power. When Jordan’s
sister wills the poor Jett land from the Benedict property, Jett grabs
it, works it, and finally discovers oil on it. He becomes rich, very
rich. In “Giant,” Stevens has presented these two representations of
the American character less sympathetically. Theirs is an aggressive      153
desire, an insatiable desire, and in the end a destructive desire.
What saves Jordan is his wife, Leslie. Having no wife, Jett is damned
by the outcome of his own desire. In “Giant,” Jordan’s wife repre-
sents conscience in the best sense of the word. Leslie stands up to
the Texan men with regard to their attitudes about women and their
attitudes toward their own Hispanic employees. The Benedicts’
marriages, family, and history are a story of desire plus conscience
that points to a better future.
    Desire takes on a different form in “Gunga Din.” Stevens frames
desire within the boyish enthusiasm of Sergeant Cutter. Cutter is
caught up in the promise of a treasure map. If he finds the treasure,
he will be rich and could leave the army and have the life of an
English gentleman at last. His colleague, Sergeant McChesney,
sees his desire satisfied in the army. For him, the army means cama-
raderie rather than duty. His desire is to keep his army triumvirate
(McChesney, Cutter, and Ballantyne) together. Ballantyne, on the
other hand, is engaged and will shortly leave the army. His desire is
the woman of his dreams (Joan Fontaine). All three men share a
common attitude toward their friendships and their work. They are
physical and capable combatants; theirs is the adolescent pursuit of
war games. It is not violence; it is energetic fun. So, another desire
they are pursuing in this film is the adolescent pleasure of being
together.
    Conscience is presented in the character of Sergeant Cutter. He
is the only character who takes an interest in the waterboy, Gunga
Din. Initially, the contact is to imitate soldierly practices such as
marching with Gunga Din. Next he enlists Din in his search for


    George Stevens: The American Character—Desire and Conscience
