When we see Raymond in his mother’s home, the depth of focus of
the images of her home conveys her power. Her dominance in the
foreground of those images tells us who is at the top of this pyramid
of power. Rarely has a matriarch been as evocatively captured visually.
    Powerlessness, on the other hand, is presented in the middle or
background of the frame, where Raymond Shaw and Bennett
Marco are so often found, as are Raymond’s victims, his newspaper
employer, Senator Jordan, and Jocelyn Jordan. And, by using a
moving camera to approach the victims, the ultimate outcome of
powerlessness, death, is all the more vividly presented.
    If the original “The Manchurian Candidate” is about externalized
power and powerlessness, Jonathan Demme’s 2004 version is about                43
something far more internal. Whether he is portraying a descent into
madness or madness run amok in the political–industrial complex,
Demme’s concerns are all the more personalized. In this version,
Bennett Marco is the main character, and Raymond Shaw occupies
the plot position the Marco character occupied in the first version. In
this version, both Shaw and Marco have been implanted with devices
to make them compliant to the wishes of the corporation—to assassi-
nate the President. In this version, Vice President Raymond Shaw will
become the corporation’s President rather than the President of all the
people. The Jordans, who played such personal roles in the first ver-
sion, are now relegated to being political adversaries. Rosie, the love
interest for the Marco character in the first version, is now an FBI
agent investigating Marco’s allegations. She pretends to be interested
in Marco romantically and, although she echoes Janet Leigh’s dia-
logue from the first version, plays a far more central role in this version.
    Demme’s director’s idea was that paranoia when it is real is not
madness, but he works with an inner sense of madness and para-
noia, particularly for Marco. Although Shaw and Al Melvin (Jeffrey
Wright) are both played off center (troubled, disturbed), in fact the
majority of the inner madness is left to Marco to portray. To deepen
this idea, Demme used many more close-up and medium-range
shots than is typical. Long shots and wide-angle shots tend to con-
textualize, and Demme was trying to take away rather than create
context. He also used a camera placement that crowds the Marco
character, again creating a sense of disturbance and that all is not
right. The pace of shots and scenes, particularly early in the film,
also suggests disruption, that the circuits are not all working.


                                                           The Good Director
