the key relationships in four of Von Trotta’s films. This approach will
           give us insight into how Von Trotta dramatically prioritizes her his-
           torical–personal idea. It will also lead us to a more particular set of
           visual choices that support her director’s idea. The films we will refer
           to are “The Lost Honor of Katharina Blum,” “The Second Awakening
           of Christa Klages,” “Marianne and Juliane,” and “Rosenstrasse.”

           “The Lost Honor of Katharina Blum” (1975)
           In “The Lost Honor of Katharina Blum,” the main character,
           Katharina Blum (Angela Winkler), is a decent working-class woman
           of high moral character and a rather shy woman, as well. She is seen
264        fraternizing with a known terrorist and is considered an accomplice
           in helping him elude police. The police collude with a tabloid
           journalist to destroy her reputation. As they proceed to systemati-
           cally destroy her, Katharina (the most decent person they know, say
           her employers) is forced to act to defend her dignity. In the end, she
           kills the journalist whose reports have misrepresented her and who
           has thrived on her public destruction. The terrorist she protected
           and loved succeeds in eluding the authorities. The sequence we will
           focus on is the opening, when the terrorist Ludwig Götten (Jürgen
           Prochnow) is eluding the police who are in close pursuit. He meets
           Katharina (the “nun,” according to police reports) at her cousin’s
           party, where they are all under surveillance. Katharina returns to
           her apartment with Ludwig and they spend the night together. In
           the morning, a police task force enters her apartment. Ludwig is
           gone but the police consider her to be an accomplice, continually
           insulting her in her own home. They treat her not only as a suspect
           but also as if she were a prostitute. She insists upon respect, as
           they are in her home, but none is forthcoming. The police and the
           prosecutor, both men, take an authoritarian and demeaning atti-
           tude toward Katharina. This is in marked contrast to the behavior of
           Ludwig toward her. He, the terrorist, is kind and considerate, while
           the authorities are aggressive and accusatory even though they are
           in her home.

           “The Second Awakening of Christa Klages” (1977)
           In “The Second Awakening of Christa Klages,” Christa (Tina Engel),
           a childcare worker, robs a bank. Acting with two male accomplices,
           she takes a bank employee hostage (Katharina Thalbach) and holds


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
