“Tess” (1981)
The third excerpt is from “Tess,” which is the story of a poor girl
from an old but noble family in England during the Industrial
Revolution. When Tess’ father, an alcoholic with a large family, dis-
covers that his name, d’Urberville, is a noble name, he sends his
eldest child Tess (Nastassja Kinski) off to find the rich relatives.
Perhaps they will buy his title or at least help their family.
Reluctantly, Tess seeks out the d’Urbervilles and finds that they are,
indeed, rich but are not really d’Urbervilles. The family bought the
title and lives on the estate. The son Alec (Leigh Lawson) is a ne’er-
do-well and he sees in his “cousin” Tess an easy conquest. After the
modest Tess takes a job on the chicken farm of the estate, Alec pur-       223
sues her and finally, a bit drunk, she gives in. She quickly leaves
Alec for home, where she has his child. The sickly child soon dies,
however. Tess sees the child’s death as punishment for her loveless
affair. When the local church will not allow the bastard baby to be
buried on church grounds, Tess sees this as further punishment.
She leaves home and goes to work on a dairy farm. There, Angel
(Peter Firth), a vicar’s son, falls in love with her and she with him.
He wants to marry her. She is reluctant because of her past. She
tries to tell him her shameful history but cannot, and her mother
advises against it. She writes Angel a letter but he never reads it, as
it was hidden under his rug. She loses her courage and destroys the
note. They marry.
    On their wedding night, Angel tells her of a short city affair with
an older woman. He asks for her forgiveness. She grants it. She then
confesses her history honestly and asks his forgiveness, but he does
not grant it. He is angry and feels betrayed. He abandons her. Tess
returns to her home, and then seeks work. The work is hard and
demeaning. Alec, to whom Tess’ mother has written, finds her and
offers to care for her and her family. Her father is unwell, and the
family will lose their home when he dies. Tess rejects Alec, but he
keeps returning. When the family is evicted following her father’s
death, they are forced to live in a tent, at which point Tess relents
and becomes Alec’s mistress.
    Angel returns, unwell. When he recovers he seeks out Tess and
asks her forgiveness, but it is too late. When he leaves, Tess is incon-
solable and, when Alec berates her, she kills him and runs after
Angel. He will save her, he claims, but in the end he cannot. The

                             Roman Polanski: The Aloneness of Existence
