insecure about, however, is his relationship with his wife. The rea-
son why is revealed in the next scene.
    Backstage, flowers arrive for Maria. Joseph is jealous, but she is
reassuring and tells him she does not know who they might be from.
This is the third consecutive evening flowers have arrived. As Joseph
leaves to go on stage Maria acknowledges to her dresser that she has
a strong suspicion regarding who might be sending the flowers. She
writes a note to accept his invitation to introduce himself and tells
him that he should leave the audience when Hamlet begins his
soliloquy. When Joseph takes the stage and steps toward the audi-
ence, ready to utter “to be or not to be,” a young flyer (Robert Stack)
in the third row stands and exits. Joseph cannot help but see the         181
handsome young lieutenant leaving his seat. In the dressing room,
Maria greets the young flyer, who invites her to go flying with him
the next afternoon. She suggests they meet at the airport, and he
leaves as Joseph’s soliloquy will soon end.
    A crushed Joseph returns to the dressing room—it is the first time
someone has walked out on him. Maria suggests that the flyer might
have taken sick; perhaps he had a heart attack. A grateful Joseph
embraces Maria. The scene ends with Joseph being consoled by his
wife. Jealousy, rivalry, and desire have been important dimensions of
this scene. For Joseph, the scene has ended on a note of conciliation.
For Maria, the scene has ended on a note of anticipation.


Text Interpretation

Directors tend to emphasize different issues in their interpretations
of scripts. For a director such as Ridley Scott, masculinity and its
habitual need to prove itself is a presence even in his films about
women (“Thelma and Louise” and “GI Jane”). The value that
prevails in a Scott film is the positive value of masculinity. What is
valued most in a Paul Mazursky film is the struggle for indepen-
dence. What is valued most in a John Cassavetes film is the tug of
war between the life force and the death force in each character. My
point here is that directors have core beliefs or issues that they work
with in their films. For Ernst Lubitsch, that core issue is romance.
   Working with romance, Lubitsch implied that all else in life—
politics, money, career, status—is secondary. Such a notion has


                             Ernst Lubitsch: The Life Force of Romance
