Two of the four films discussed here mix politics and romance.
       “Ninotchka,” set in Paris, puts a capitalist, Count Leon d’Algout
       (Melvyn Douglas), with a communist trade envoy named
       Ninotchka (Greta Garbo). Will politics or love prevail? The plot of
       “Ninotchka”—the sale of a famous set of jewels confiscated from
       the Grand Duchess Swana and now in the possession of the Soviet
       Government—only serves to complicate the agendas of the two
       lovers. For the Count, it is a matter of love or money; for Ninotchka,
       it is a matter of love or duty. Naturally, love prevails.
           In “To Be or Not To Be,” the politics of nationalism complicates
       the relationship between two married actors, Joseph (Jack Benny)
176    and Maria Tura (Carole Lombard). They are the leading actors in
       pre-World War II Poland. Narcissistic Maria encourages a young
       Polish flyer to develop a relationship with her. When war inter-
       venes, the flyer escapes to England, and the jealous husband
       remains in Warsaw with his wife. A Nazi spy infiltrates the Polish
       command in London, takes the names of Poles in London working
       for the Allies, and returns to Warsaw and the Gestapo, list in hand.
       The young Polish flyer is enlisted to stop the spy. Returning to
       Poland, he enlists the help of Joseph and Maria Tura to help him
       kill the spy and save the flyers. This requires Joseph to pretend to be
       the spy with the Gestapo and an actor in the troupe to be Hitler. All
       is well with the jealous Joseph, who retains at least for the moment
       the devotion of his narcissistic wife.
           In “Trouble in Paradise,” Lubitsch focuses on the politics of the
       romantic relationship. Gaston Monescu is a thief. When his pocket
       is skillfully picked by Lily, also a thief, they fall in love. The politics
       of the relationship are challenged when Monescu also falls in love
       with a rich victim, Madame Colet of Paris. Will Gaston survive?
       Will Gaston and Lily survive, both professionally and personally?
           The politics are more complicated in “The Shop Around the
       Corner.” At Matuschek and Company, a high-end retailer in
       Budapest, Hungary, Alfred Kralik (James Stewart) is a serious and
       successful employee. Indeed, he is the senior salesman. His main
       challenge is a needy Mr. Matuschek (Frank Morgan), an older man
       with a younger wife. Matuschek considers Kralik to be a valued
       employee but also a serious rival. The story focuses on the relation-
       ship between Kralik and Clara Novak (Margaret Sullivan). Clara, a
       new employee, is a constant irritant to the officious Alfred. The plot


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
