adversaries are juxtaposed only heightens the sense that a hero is
          being created as we watch. Fuqua almost fetishizes the struggle
          between these opposites.
              Because so much of the plot is battle, the moving camera,
          whether a steadicam or camera mounted on a helicopter or crane,
          is important. Movement gives a majestic aesthetic to battle and
          scale to the opposing sides. Editing on action and specific violence
          to individuals adds to the fetishizing of violence, a key factor to
          being victorious. Consequently, the dynamic of battle becomes cen-
          tral to Fuqua as action director. Although his battle scenes are not
          as emotionally loaded as Kubrick’s nor as aesthetic as Ridley Scott’s
32        battle sequences in “Gladiator,” Fuqua nevertheless manages to
          make the battles compelling. The settings become critical—the
          battle on the ice is beautiful to watch as are all the fires and smoke
          during the battle on Badon Hill. The scenes are devoid of logic, but
          the look of the battles is every bit as evocative as the dance
          sequences in Adrian Lyne’s “Flashdance.” I am suggesting that, for
          Fuqua, the look of the battle was as important as who is fighting or
          who is winning. The battles are dynamic and exciting, but do not
          probe too deeply for their logic because that is not what Fuqua is
          interested in.
              “King Arthur,” like the work of Adrian Lyne or Tony Scott, is easy
          on the eyes and has an MTV pace, but it lacks subtext and a layered
          character arc. Instead, the film is enjoyable as a linear entertain-
          ment populated by beautiful people. Its director, Antoine Fuqua,
          exemplifies the competent director.



          Case Study II. The Competent Director:
          Simon Wincer (“The Lighthorsemen,” 1987)
          Simon Wincer’s “The Lighthorsemen,” a war film set in World
          War I, is about the desert campaign in the Middle East and the role
          played by the Lighthorsemen, mounted infantry from Australia. At
          the beginning of the film, Danny, a young man in Australia,
          expresses an interest in joining the Lighthorsemen, and the film
          follows him to the British campaign against the Turks to take
          Jerusalem. The film focuses on one battle in the campaign, the


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
