response to a character or situation. Anthony Mann, a director who
worked with the cinematographer John Alton in the late 1940s, liked
to use high key light in films such as “T-Men.” These stories about
gangsters and the police who pursued them benefited from a highly
dramatic lighting design.
    Lighting can be used to focus on victims and victimizers long
before the narrative acknowledges the fate of these characters.
Mann is, in fact, part of a tradition of directors who are interested in
the psychological complexity light can lend to their characters.
Joseph Von Sternberg was interested in using lighting to create a
sexual aura around his characters. Michael Mann, on the other
hand, used lighting to either question or confirm the honesty of his          95
characters in “Thief” and “Collateral.” William Wyler used lighting
to reflect the power or powerlessness of his characters in “The Little
Foxes.” Directors who are interested in using lighting for a partic-
ular purpose need to be as specific as they can be when setting
guidelines for interpretation of characters and the narrative. In this
sense, lighting can be a very important tool for executing the
director’s idea.


Art Direction

After lighting, art direction is the most critical area that supports the
director’s idea as it plays out shot after shot. Art direction refers to
the nature and organization of all the physical content of the shot.
This includes the artifacts in the shot, their organization, and the
look of the room that holds the contents, down to the color of the
walls. Art direction also refers to the costumes of the actors. All of
these elements contribute not only to the veracity of a shot but also
to the mood conjured up in the shot.
    Yann Samuell’s “Love Me If You Dare” is a bold interpretation
of a male–female relationship over the 30 years of their relationship.
The two characters, who meet as preadolescents, see life and their
relationship as a game between only the two of them; consequently,
there is a constant sense of provocation, desire, and exclusivity.
The film is almost operatic in the mood swings it portrays. The art
direction had to reflect all of these moods, which it did through
the use of bold colors that are extreme and unnatural.


                                                                 The Camera
