two were famous in their native countries (Germany and Great
          Britain, respectively). William Wyler, Fred Zinnemann, Billy
          Wilder, Milos Forman, and Paul Verhoeven all emigrated from
          Europe and each made significant American films.
              When I look at the films made over the past 30 years (excluding
          the work of the directors we will discuss shortly), I can identify ten
          great films made by great directors: Bob Fosse’s “All That Jazz”
          (1981), Robert Altman’s “The Player” (1992), Steven Spielberg’s
          “Schindler’s List” (1994), Paul Anderson’s “Boogie Nights” (1995),
          Spike Lee’s “Do the Right Thing” (1998), Sydney Pollack’s “Tootsie”
          (1983), Terence Malick’s “The Thin Red Line” (1997), Oliver
58        Stone’s “Natural Born Killers” (1994), Michael Cimino’s “The Deer
          Hunter” (1997), and Clint Eastwood’s “Mystic River” (2003). All are
          great films by great directors.
              My choice of directors to discuss here was based on their work
          over the last 30 years. Each director has, on an ongoing basis, used
          a director’s idea that has powerfully amplified the experience of his
          work. We will look at each in turn: Francis Ford Coppola, Woody
          Allen, and Martin Scorsese.
              Francis Ford Coppola’s films “The Godfather” (1972), “The
          Godfather: Part II” (1975), and “Apocalypse Now” (1979) share a com-
          mon director’s idea: to view the narrative events of each film not as
          believable but rather as an opera, which requires an intensification of
          dramatic events. “The Godfather” and “The Godfather: Part II” each
          revolves around Michael Corleone as the main character. The
          choices Michael must make are between his career (professional) and
          his family (personal). In each film, Michael chooses the professional
          option and sacrifices his family. As in opera, where celebrations and
          crises are the focus, Connie’s wedding, her husband battering her, the
          assassination attempt on Don Corleone, the assassination of Sonny,
          the baptism of Connie’s baby, and the killings of all those responsible
          for acting against the Don and his business interests all mark the orig-
          inal “The Godfather.” The assassination attempt on Michael on the
          day of his son’s confirmation, the assassination attempt on Hyman
          Roth, the Cuban revolution, the discovery by Michael that his
          brother Fredo betrayed him, and the settling of all accounts, includ-
          ing the murder of Fredo, mark the sequel, “The Godfather: Part II.”
          Both films treat these events as set pieces so there is a ritual feeling
          to these narrative events. The focus on the intensity of death, love,


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
