clients act out their sexual desires to the detriment of their relation-
       ships and in spite of their social position? Why do all the people
       he admires and cares about seek danger and thrills? Should he, too?
       He does seek out danger and thrills that threaten his marriage,
       but in the end he and his wife, almost in a state of resignation, opt
       to remain together.
           The sequence we are concerned with begins with preparations
       for Victor Ziegler’s Christmas party at his home, which looks like a
       museum. The Harfords know no one, but Alice seems to be taken
       up with looking at those who may or may not be looking at her. She
       seems to seek the looking, to need it. And she finds it. Bill is scooped
238    away to rescue his host from potential embarrassment when his
       woman of the moment almost dies of an overdose. Alone, Alice is
       approached by a handsome Hungarian lothario who, as Alice con-
       tinues to become more drunk, attempts to sweep her off her feet. In
       the end, after many dances, he proposes a tryst but she points to her
       wedding ring. He retorts that her ring should only liberate her to do
       as she wishes (in her search for pleasure). She waves goodnight but
       with a mixed message. She blows him a kiss. The evening concludes
       with a sexual encounter between husband and wife, but, as earlier,
       Alice looks away as if to see if anyone else is admiring her, besides
       her husband.


       Text Interpretation
       Kubrick’s director’s idea, the darkness of modern life, required
       a scale of narrative ambition that is rare in filmmaking. Only
       D.W. Griffith, Eisenstein, and Orson Welles have exhibited a simi-
       lar level of ambition. Kubrick was always attracted to themes of
       scale. In some cases, the scale was so great as to defeat the project,
       as in the case of his Napoleon film, but even early in his career
       Kubrick was able to create epic narratives. In 1957, he made “Paths
       of Glory” from the Humphrey Cobb novel. Even a director of the
       stature of George Stevens had been unable to unlock studio support
       for the production of the Cobb novel. Kubrick was able to do it by
       securing one major star, Kirk Douglas. By making the film in
       Europe at the Munich Studios and by using B actors for the other
       roles, Kubrick was able to produce a film of enormous narrative


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
