internal (the prisoner of alcohol in “The Lost Weekend”). Whatever
           the cause, the struggle of Wilder’s main characters is a struggle for
           existence. The consequence is a titanic struggle for survival in each
           of Wilder’s films.
               To amplify the struggle Wilder uses two elements—the desper-
           ation of his main character and the presence of an antagonist. Joe
           Gillis (William Holden), the failed Hollywood screenwriter in
           “Sunset Boulevard,” is at the end of the road. His car is about to
           be repossessed, he can expect no more favors from producers, and
           he is about to return home to Ohio a failure when he meets his
           antagonist, Norma Desmond (Gloria Swanson), a silent screen
164        star who is lonely and eager to make a comeback. Joe Gillis and
           Norma Desmond need each other but in the end destroy one
           another.
               In “The Apartment,” C.C. Baxter (Jack Lemmon) is so desperate
           to move up in the insurance business that he does favors for insur-
           ance executives who are in a position to help him be promoted.
           He lends four of them his apartment for sexual trysts even though
           they endlessly put him out of his own home. Only when he lends
           his apartment to Mr. Sheldrake (Fred MacMurray), the executive
           in charge of personnel, does he get his promotion. Sheldrake is
           C.C. Baxter’s antagonist, principally because he controls Baxter’s
           professional horizon and because his mistress is Miss Fran Kubelik
           (Shirley MacLaine), the woman with whom Baxter hopes to have a
           relationship. For both Joe Gillis and C.C. Baxter, their existence is
           wrapped up with their professional identity.
               In both “Sunset Boulevard” and “The Apartment,” whether the
           main character can survive is tested. As expected in film noir, Joe Gillis
           is destroyed. As expected in situation comedy, C.C. Baxter survives, a
           better man than his corporate antagonist.
               In “The Lost Weekend,” the main character Don Birnam
           (Ray Milland) is an alcoholic. His demon is himself and his fear
           of failure that has made him risk averse in his career as a writer
           and in his personal life with Helen (Jane Wyman). That fear
           has made him what he is, an alcoholic. The film focuses on a
           weekend when has Don promised to try to change but it turns out
           to be the weekend when he bottoms out, a process that takes him
           to the brink of suicide. In this case, Don is his own worst enemy,
           his own antagonist.


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
