details. In leaping from one roof to another, Sergeant Ballantyne
       crashes through the roof and one of his feet becomes stuck.
       Sergeant Cutter’s efforts to save Ballantyne include a back and forth
       toss of a stick of dynamite, first from Cutter, back via the Thuggees
       landing adjacent to Ballantyne, and then back via Cutter to explode
       near the Thuggees. The humor assures us that our outnumbered
       heroes are in no danger. In this sequence Gunga Din reintroduces
       his desire to be a soldier. He has a weapon and wants to use it,
       but Sergeant McChesney takes it away. This kind of dramatic
       detail keeps the longer-term narrative strand at the forefront for the
       audience.
158        The sequence is very physical and marked by the confident
       prowess of the three sergeants. Stevens sustains the energetic tone
       through the use of detail and a lively pace. The sequence is clear
       from a narrative point of view and stimulating from a visual point of
       view. The location shooting of the film yielded considerable visual
       and narrative benefits. This sequence became the benchmark for
       later films and filmmakers in this genre, particularly the “Indiana
       Jones” series made by George Lucas and Steven Spielberg.
           Pace and timing with differing intentions characterize the
       excerpts from “Alice Adams” and “The More the Merrier.” Stevens
       began his directing career working on two reelers with comedians,
       primarily Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy. Creating comedy based
       on farce and comedy based on tragedy (strong emotional responses
       involving tears and laughter) were goals in this early work. These
       are the very qualities we see in “Alice Adams” and “The More the
       Merrier.” The key here is to be as specific as possible to make the
       sequence plausible.
           In “Alice Adams,” the dinner scene should be the culmination of
       Alice’s hopes and dreams. She is having Arthur—rich, handsome
       Arthur—over to her house for dinner. It is the first time he will meet
       her family, and it is her first reality check. Dinner is a disaster,
       Alice’s worst nightmare. Making this long (10-minute) sequence
       both emotional and funny was the challenge for Stevens.
           Let’s first address the specifics on which Stevens relied. A meal
       progresses through its various courses (e.g., appetizer, soup, salad,
       entrée, dessert). The key here is that each course of Alice’s impor-
       tant dinner is inappropriate. The appetizers, caviar on crackers, are
       untested and a pretense in a household aspiring to present itself as


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
