police find them and she is taken away to prison. Justice is done,
           and Tess is hanged.
               The excerpt we will use is when Tess tries to tell Angel of her past
           before she agrees to marry him. Although she fails to tell him before
           the marriage, she is mindful of the need to enter into the marriage
           honestly, as admonished by the priest at the wedding ceremony.
           That night, after Angel’s confession to her, she in turn confesses and
           loses him. He runs off to Brazil, abandoning Tess to her fate. This
           effort at honesty and the consequent abandonment will be the focus
           of our discussion about “Tess.”

224        “The Pianist” (2002)
           The last excerpt is from “The Pianist,” which begins with the
           German invasion of Poland and ends when the war ends. “The
           Pianist” is Wladyslaw Szpilman (Adrien Brody), a world-famous
           pianist, a Jew who survives the war because Jews, Poles, and
           Germans, at different points through the war, have acted to save his
           life. The film is about Szpilman’s survival, but it is also about all the
           losses he sustains. The sequence we will focus on is his effort in 1942
           to secure work papers for his father. The effort only delays the
           inevitable—the deportation of the Szpilman family to a death
           camp. Eventually, Szpilman, his parents, and his three siblings are
           gathered at the train station with hundreds of others. Just when they
           are to be herded onto the transport train, a Jewish policeman pulls
           Szpilman from the crowd and encourages him to escape because he
           is a person worth saving. This is when he is torn away from his fam-
           ily, who is pressed onto the train. A German soldier rips the violin
           from his father’s hands. This is the last time Szpilman will see his
           family. He helps another Jew cart bodies from the site and is over-
           whelmed with the grief of loss. Around him are the dead. He seeks
           out the small apartment where his family lived in the Jewish ghetto.
           Now it is empty but for the artifacts, and Szpilman is alone.


           Text Interpretation

           In terms of our experience of the director’s idea, it is important that
           the state of aloneness be powerfully conveyed as we experience the
           main characters, their goals, and the power of the antagonists and


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
