A similar pattern emerges around Joe Gillis’ character in
“Sunset Boulevard.” I have already mentioned the romantic/cyni-
cal paradox that plays out in Gillis’ relationships with Norma
Desmond and Betty White. Another layer in these relationships is
Gillis’ work as a screenwriter. Gillis, a writer of modest success, is
losing the battle in Hollywood, but he is holding on for dear life to
stay and continue his dream of achieving success as a Hollywood
screenwriter. To hold onto that dream, he takes on the job of
rewriting Norma Desmond’s “Salome” script. He knows the story is
childish and not worthy of being produced, but he does the rewrite
to stay in Hollywood and hold onto his dream. When he meets
Betty, a development person who liked his past work, she encour-              171
ages him to let go of his cynicism and be vulnerable and commit-
ted as a writer. Working with Betty he gets back in touch with the
positive dimensions of himself that were important to his past writ-
ing. Wilder directed Holden to be less cynical and more vulnera-
ble. The performance of William Holden, in all its modulation,
embraced cynicism and conveyed a passion for achieving Gillis’
goal, as well as a vulnerability that hinted at the deeper, more pos-
itive dimensions of his original goal—to be a writer in Hollywood.
    Also critical to performances in Wilder films is that everything is
at stake for the character. The actor not only has to pull out all the
stops but must also enter a kind of obsessive madness. If the character
is too stable, the performance will fail. If the character is either exces-
sively rational or unstable, the performance will fail. This is why it is
difficult to imagine Marlon Brando or Clark Gable in a Wilder film.
They represent opposite extremes of characters. Instead, Wilder cast
for “normality” or at least its appearance—Ray Milland, Fred
MacMurray, Jack Lemmon—and then explores what happens to his
characters when they enter into an obsessive madness. It is their very
ordinariness that enables these performers to transport us to the eerie
edge where we understand that their very existence is at stake.


Directing the Camera

The first thing one notices about Wilder’s work is how well written it
is. Performance and camera are far more subservient to the writing
than is the case of the other directors discussed so far. As a result,


                                           Billy Wilder: Existence at Stake
