in “Schindler’s List.” The results are mixed principally because
Spielberg has moved away from the romantic character arc so funda-
mental to the majority of his films.


Directing the Camera

Spielberg tries to achieve a number of goals through his use of cam-
era placement, camera motion, and pace. The guiding principles
seem to be:

   1. Keep the story clear.                                                 255
   2. Keep the story moving.
   3. Identification with the main character is important.
   4. Specific details should advance plot and character.
   5. Keep it exciting.
   6. Pace and point of view are the key.

We will deal with each of these in turn. Keep in mind that each of
these features is important to the joy of filmmaking. Above all is
Spielberg’s ability to project this joy in his films. It is this joy that
buoys up his director’s idea. Keeping the story clear is about visual
signposts. The excerpt from “Jaws” will serve to illustrate this clarity.
Police Chief Brody and his family are sitting on the beach. The
beach is crowded. Children are playing with their toys in the water,
teenagers flirt, and older people are just trying to keep cool on a hot
day. While Mrs. Brody is busy enjoying the day and watching her
two sons, Brody is worried. He is focused on the danger of another
shark attack. His point of view is all about watching the water.
When Spielberg wants to remind us about this concern, he momen-
tarily blocks Brody’s line of sight line to the beach. More tension is
built when Brody spots a sudden movement in the water. It looks
like a shark’s fin but it proves to be an elderly man’s swimming cap.
The next false start is a sudden violent eruption in the water when
a teenager lifts his girlfriend up and out of the water. She screams
in delight rather than terror.
    Potential victims of the shark are put into position. A teenager
playing with his dog throws a piece of driftwood out into the ocean,
and the dog goes after it for its master. A woman guides her youngster


                                    Steven Spielberg: Childhood Forever
