What works less well here are the actors’ performances feeding
      this sense of madness and paranoia. The performances tend to be
      too realistic. Perhaps an example from a director’s idea keyed to per-
      formance will illustrate my point here. Elia Kazan, in his direction
      of performances in “Splendor in the Grass,” perfectly captured his
      director’s idea. “Splendor in the Grass,” set in 1928 Kansas, tells the
      story of two teenagers in love. Deenie is beautiful and poor. Bud is
      handsome and rich. Both are overflowing with sexual desire and
      both are mindful of their parents’ admonitions. Her mother tells her
      that boys don’t respect girls who go all the way. His father tells him
      that he has plans for him (to go to Yale and take over the business),
44    and if he gets Deenie pregnant he will have to marry her (and ruin
      his life).
          Kazan begins the film in mid shot. The two main characters,
      Deenie and Bud, are kissing passionately in his convertible, parked
      adjacent to a waterfall. The sensuality at the core of the scene is
      powerful, but the scene ends with Bud frustrated at Deenie’s resis-
      tance to go any further than petting. The next scene is between
      Deenie and her mother after Bud has dropped her at home. The
      scene that follows is Bud’s return home and his encounter with his
      father. Both Deenie and Bud try to articulate their feelings but nei-
      ther parent allows those feelings to be acknowledged. Deenie and
      Bud are clearly overwhelmed by their desire, and the parents warn
      their children about the consequences of that desire. Here is the
      point where Kazan’s brilliance with actors deepens the director’s
      idea. Kazan’s director’s idea is that sexuality is tactile and good but
      to censor it is destructive.
          In the scene between Deenie and her mother, the mother states
      her position. Deenie asks about whether she, the mother, ever felt
      (as Deenie does about Bud) desire for Deenie’s father, her husband.
      Deenie at this point embraces and holds on to the mother, as the
      mother tells her that women do not like sex and they give in to their
      husbands’ sexual desires only after they are married. When the
      mother is not being held by her daughter she is munching away at
      a sandwich. The tactile quality, the physical need of each character
      is pronounced and central here; it overrides what is being said. For
      Kazan the need to touch is more important than the words spoken.
          We find a parallel in the scene between Bud and his father.
      What Bud is trying to say is that he loves Deenie, but the father


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
