been killed in World War I. The lethality of the war as well as
                 the plot to find him and restore the relationship seem closer
                 to fantasy than a realistic likelyhood. Unless plot puts some kind
                 of obstacle in the way of the main character achieving his or
                 her goal, the plot is not working. Think also of the voyage of
                 the Titanic in “Titanic” as an example where the plot works
                 effectively. The ship sinks, and Rose’s hope for love becomes
                 a memory rather than a reality. Deploying plot in a story can be
                 a major weakness for directors, so this aspect of the director’s
                 idea requires considerable attention.
              5. How do the secondary characters representing the two choices
332              of the premise fit in with the premise? Are they two distinct
                 groups—helpers and harmers? Is one of the harmers more
                 essential than the others? How? This character, the antago-
                 nist, can be the most critical character of all, determining
                 the vigor of the main character’s response, the shape of the
                 character arc, and how we feel about the main character at
                 the end. The more powerful the antagonist, the more
                 heroic the sense of our main character at the end. In their
                 nature and actions, secondary characters serve specific pur-
                 poses in a script. The more they resonate as people rather
                 than story elements, the richer the script will be. Although
                 we experience the story through a main character, second-
                 ary characters can help the script seem more credible and
                 compelling.

               Let’s return to the genre issue at this point. Genre implies the
           dramatic arc of the film. A thriller is a chase; a police story is about
           solving a crime and putting the criminal away; a gangster film is the
           rise and fall of the main character; a science fiction film is a story
           about the threat of technology to humanity. Some genres are inter-
           nal. The melodrama is about an interior journey around loss, ambi-
           tion, or spiritual rebirth. The situation comedy is about values in life
           and the behavior of the main character (e.g., a man pretends to be
           a woman to further his ambitions for his career in “Tootsie”).
           Westerns also tend to be about values, with the pastoral, free past
           representing the positive and civilization and progress representing
           the negative. Each genre has a different shape. What is the dramatic
           arc, and how does it serve the goal of the main character? If the


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
