In “A Face in the Crowd” (1957), Lonesome Rhodes (Andy
       Griffith) is a vagrant musician who becomes a populist radio
       commentator and later an influential television star. This trajectory
       is due partially to Lonesome’s talent but more often to his lying,
       cheating, and manipulating those who have helped him the most.
       Whether in matters of labor or love, Lonesome Rhodes becomes
       a monster made by the media. Where a performance begins and
       real life leaves off is blurred. His agent, Marcia Jeffries (Patricia
       Neal), is blinded by Lonesome’s charismatic personality. He mar-
       ries another woman a day after promising to marry Marcia simply to
       let her know he is the master of his life and career, and she begins
190    to awaken to the true Lonesome Rhodes. When she switches on a
       microphone during his television show to let his audience know
       what he really thinks of them, she is trying to destroy the myth and
       the man she herself helped create.
           In each film, the life situation and the characters—Bud and
       Deannie, Emiliano Zapata, Lonesome Rhodes—are extreme in
       their nature, their goals, and their character arcs. It is as if larger
       forces are at work propelling the characters to the highs and lows of
       mythic characters. Protagonists and antagonists all take on equiv-
       alent proportions in a Kazan film. The battle of will versus will
       allowed Kazan to bring his director’s idea into play.
           Kazan’s film career spanned 30 years, from “A Tree Grows in
       Brooklyn” in 1946 to “The Last Tycoon” in 1975. In between he went
       through recognizable phases. The social/political films are repre-
       sented by “Gentleman’s Agreement” (1947) and “On the Waterfront”
       (1954), both Academy Award winning films. His prestige projects
       include “A Streetcar Named Desire” (1952) and “East of Eden”
       (1954). His personal films include “America, America” (1963) and
       “The Arrangement” (1969). After growing disillusioned with com-
       mercial theater and film, Kazan increasingly moved toward more
       personal work, primarily writing novels. In the mid-1980s, he wrote
       his personal memoir, A Life (Doubleday, 1988). That book is a
       compelling read. Kazan, the writer, working with his director’s idea,
       transports us vividly into the drama that was his own life.
           Before we move into the films we will focus on in this chapter,
       it is useful to discuss a number of qualities that stand out in Elia
       Kazan’s work. Above all, Kazan was a director of great performances.
       No other actor was more fused with Kazan than Marlon Brando.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
