To further clarify this approach to acting, I turn to acting coach
Judith Weston (Directing Actors, Michael Wiese Productions, 1999)
and director David Mamet (On Directing Film, Penguin, 1992), who
have best articulated the “how” of it. Weston has adapted a combi-
nation of the Adler and Meisner approaches to acting. Her focus is
on the imaginative creation of a character and she has devised a
series of suggested strategies to help the actor “be in the moment”
and create a living character who can reach out and engage the
audience. First, actors need to work with a set of resources of their
own. These resources include their memories or personal experi-
ences, their observations of others, their imagination accessed by
improvisation, and their immediate experience. Immediate experi-           115
ence and observation refer to the outer world, the world around the
actor. The actor’s memories and imagination refer to the actor’s
inner life. Critical here is the issue of access. Lee Strasberg devel-
oped the strategy of sense memory, complete with exercises to access
those memories and the attendant feelings, Stella Adler developed
exercises to access imagination, and Sanford Meisner created a rep-
etition exercise to access and elaborate upon immediate experience
(and to deliver the actor into the moment). Think of each of these
exercises as accessing a well of feeling that the actor can funnel ener-
getically into the creation of a character. Using that energy, the actor
creates a character. To develop that character, though, a number of
choices must be made. Those choices should be based on a deep
understanding of the character and should be directed toward devel-
oping a character who is authentic, moving toward a true under-
standing and articulation of the self in the sense of truth Stanislavsky
intended, not just verisimilitude but rather a character who has an
inner life, an outer reality, and a spiritual layer.
    To move into the mechanics of character creation, the actor
needs to determine what the spine of that character will be. In a
sense this means coming to an understanding of the subtext of the
screen story. When defining the character, it is useful to consider
what obstacles the character will face. What is the spine? By spine
I mean the underlying goal of the character. Whether the goal is an
existential one or Weltanschauung (the reason for being), the actor
needs to understand the spine in practical terms. Weston uses the
example of Michael in “The Godfather” (see Weston’s Directing
Actors, p. 100). She feels (and I agree) that Michael’s underlying


                                                                  The Actor
