destination by truck. Indiana Jones finds a white stallion and begins
           his pursuit. In this sequence, Spielberg pits the old versus the new,
           brains versus brawn, and the result is one of the greatest chase
           sequences in modern film. Indiana Jones must catch up with the
           truck, mount the truck while it is in motion, and disable the guard
           and driver. The danger to all three participants is considerable.
           What is important in a sequence such as this is narrative clarity
           (what is happening and who is winning) and dramatic punctua-
           tion, as well as, I might add, a factor of excitement. This sequence
           has all of these ingredients and then some. It is a joyous tribute to
           the idea of the chase.
250
           “E.T.” (1982)
           The third excerpt is from “E.T.,” which begins with the extraterres-
           trial being left on Earth by accident. The arrival of a group of trucks
           forces the mother ship to leave without E.T. A wayward, intelligent
           ten-year-old named Elliott (Henry Thomas) is the middle of three
           children being raised by their mother (the father has abandoned the
           family). Elliott finds E.T., befriends E.T., and eventually helps E.T.
           return to his home. The trucks at the beginning of the film are in
           fact government authorities in pursuit of the extraterrestrial. They
           are essentially the antagonists of the film. Enlisting his older brother
           and his friends, Elliott helps E.T. escape from government posses-
           sion and returns him to the ship that will take him home. The
           excerpt we will focus on is the opening scene when E.T. is aban-
           doned on Earth. The sequence unfolds almost silently and without
           an emphasis on faces; that is, there is little identification of the
           humans and the extraterrestrials. The extraterrestrials are there for a
           purpose—refueling, perhaps. E.T. wanders off, curious about the
           city in the valley. Suddenly trucks pull up. We never see the faces of
           the humans but we do see keys and a badge. They are using flash-
           lights and seem to be looking for the extraterrestrial. He is spotted,
           and they pursue him. As the agents approach the ship, the extrater-
           restrials draw up their walkway and take off, leaving E.T. behind.
           He eludes the humans and makes his way down into the valley, with
           the humans in hot pursuit. The sequence ends. Thus far, we have
           only seen E.T.’s hands and primarily the humans’ feet. No discern-
           able close-ups have provided any characterization or insight into
           why the pursuit is happening.


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
