with another human being—as revealed, for example, in “A Short
Film about Loving.”
    In addition to the very strong voices of great directors are partic-
ular characteristics that mark their work. First, the work is marked
by a level of passion that is unusual; a good example is Carl Dreyer
in his silent film “The Passion of Joan of Arc” (1928). A second qual-
ity is the capacity to stake out a distinct position in the film; this
capacity is notable in the work of Roman Polanski, who we will
discuss later in the book. His film “A Knife in the Water” (1962)
exemplifies this characteristic. A third quality is a simplicity in the
director’s approach to the subject. Ernanno Olmi’s “Il Posto” (1965)
is a good example of such simplicity and is enormously powerful. A          57
fourth quality is an economy of narrative, or the ability to say a great
deal in a single shot; Luis Bunuel’s film “Belle de Jour” (1967) and
Ernst Lubitsch’s film “Ninotchka” (1939) are good examples.
Finally, the great director has a distinctive style that may resemble a
documentary, as in Roberto Rossellini’s “The Rise of Louis XIV”
(1968) and Gillo Pontecorvo’s “The Battle of Algiers” (1968), or may
be highly stylized, as in Luchino Visconti’s “The Leopard” (1965)
and Federico Fellini’s “8 1/2” (1962). Whatever mix we find in a
particular director, these qualities only serve to strengthen that
director’s voice.



Three Contemporary Great Directors
in America
Although this section is about American directors, I must say
I struggled with my choices. What is one to do with Peter Weir, the
Australian who has been making films in America since “Dead
Poet’s Society” and “Witness”? And what of Sam Mendes, the
British theater director who is responsible for two great American
films—“American Beauty” and “The Road to Perdition”? What
needs to be said is that Hollywood has always been the creative
home for immigrants and even temporary visitors. The first
Academy Award went to a film called “Sunrise” (1927), which was
directed by the German F.W. Murnau. Charlie Chaplin, Ernst
Lubitsch, and Alfred Hitchcock all immigrated here, and the latter


                                                       The Great Director
