battle for Beersheba. Danny replaces a veteran who has been
injured. Three battle-hardened Lighthorsemen comprise the core
relationships for Danny. They are judges and jury as Danny dis-
covers he cannot shoot a man. Rather than endanger his mates, he
joins the ambulance corps. At the battle for Beersheba, he saves
one of his three mates while another dies in battle. Danny falls in
love with a nurse, meets an eccentric intelligence officer, and gen-
erally wrestles with his conscience while the Lighthorsemen save
the day, win the battle, and go on to national glory in Australia.
    The film is an Australian production, but it differs considerably
from the earlier “Gallipoli” (1982), a film that condemns the war
losses sustained by Australian units under British command.                33
Wincer’s approach is essentially entertaining, more action adven-
ture than war film. Wincer is the director of the celebrated televi-
sion film, “Lonesome Dove,” and he remains very much in demand
as a director of Westerns for television. I have chosen to discuss
Wincer’s work here because he is such a successful director and his
work is so likeable that my remarks about him should be viewed as
a positive take on the competent director as opposed to a critique.
What I would like to suggest is that by the choices he has made
Wincer has established himself as a competent director.
    As to those choices, let us look at them through a prism of six spe-
cific criteria, the first five having to do with text interpretation and
the sixth with the direction of the camera:

   1. Simplicity or complexity of the narrative
   2. Approach to characterization
   3. How the director treats the narrative (literally or as a start
      point)
   4. Issue of surprise
   5. Point of view of the director
   6. Where the director chooses to place the camera

    Turning to the narrative of “The Lighthorsemen,” we see this
simplified narrative intent played out repeatedly. A nurse in the hos-
pital attends to Danny’s wounds. Very quickly they move from a
caregiver–patient relationship to would-be lovers. Earlier in the
film, Danny has accompanied his colonel on a scouting patrol, dur-
ing which they encounter a British officer parlaying with the local


                                                  The Competent Director
