Despite advice from his officers to the contrary, Nevsky decides
to meet the Teutonic knights and their army before they reach
Russian territory—in the middle of frozen Chudskoye Lake. The
danger of fighting on frozen ice will be mitigated by the heavier
German armor (they are more likely to break through the ice than
the Russians). He also organizes a strategy to draw the Germans
into battle and then attack their flanks as they are intensely engaged
with the defending Russian force. Nevsky is victorious.
    From an acting point of view, Cherkassov must convince us of
his resolve and superior strategy. Building upon the charisma and
strength of character established earlier in the film, Cherkassov
presents a realistic portrait of a Russian hero. The style of acting is    127
no different from the portrayal of that other great general, George
Patton, in Franklin Schaffner’s “Patton.” George C. Scott must
convince us of Patton’s resolve and his brilliance, just as Cherkassov
did in his portrayal of Nevsky.
    The performance demands on Cherkassov and Eisenstein are far
more complex in Part I of “Ivan the Terrible.” Ivan, the 16th-century
monarch who unifies Russia under his czarship, faces not only
external enemies in the east and west but also internal enemies—
his nobles, the Boyars. Faced with enemies all around, Ivan as a
character must project strength and determination, as well as an
inner psychological complexity. In Part I, Ivan has to deal with
betrayal by those princes closest to him—Kurbsky and Phillip. He
also loses his wife, poisoned by his own aunt. In Part II, we learn
that Ivan’s mother was poisoned by the Boyars when he was an
11-year-old boy, and Ivan must summon up the will to be as ruthless
as his aunt and the other Boyars. This requires a kind of dementia
that embraces cruelty as an understandable, even inevitable
adaptation. In other words, Ivan adopts a surname, “the Terrible,” to
help him prevail, but in doing so he becomes a psychotic killer.
    As can be imagined, the depth of performance has to be broad
and convincing, and Cherkassov created a performance that is large
enough to convince. Whereas the Nevsky performance required
a credibility that was believable, the Ivan performance required a
theatricality usually associated with opera. Extreme and stylized,
Cherkassov’s Ivan captures a mercurial character that can love or
hate, someone who is up to the task of uniting a country, or someone
who feels abandoned by everyone in the world. The performance


                             Sergei Eisenstein: The Historical Dialectic
