pummels Bud verbally with his ambitions for his son. All the while
the father also physically pummels Bud, punching him with a mix
of pride and aggression. As he punches Bud’s shoulders, again we
are aware of how much each of these characters needs a physical
connection. Again, Kazan used his direction of the performances
to illustrate the primacy of the physical. Indeed, for Kazan, desire
and physicality are life itself, while control and censorship imply a
life half lived and worse, as the tragedy that befalls these two
lovers suggests.
    Returning to Jonathan Demme’s treatment of the performances
in “The Manchurian Candidate,” I have suggested that overall they
were too realistic. Although Raymond Shaw and his mother are pre-          45
sented as narcissistic and political, we do not sense any madness
here nor is there madness to be found in the Marco character.
Because Rosie is there not as a bystander drawn to Marco in the
midst of a panic attack (as in the first version) but rather as an FBI
plant, she gives credibility to Marco’s eccentric behavior.
Consequently, only Wright’s portrayal of Al Melvin’s character sug-
gests the madness that is necessary to make the director’s idea work
as effectively as does his early camera placements. The realism of
the performances suggests that the political–industrial complex has
an agenda that is credible and feasible. And, in good thriller fashion,
the audience is saved when Marco kills Shaw and his mother, pre-
venting them from highjacking the presidency. Were the perfor-
mances keyed to the director’s idea as they were in Kazan’s
“Splendor in the Grass,” this remake of “The Manchurian
Candidate” would have been as unnerving as the original.
    Having looked at how a director’s idea shapes choices for the
director and how those choices either deepen the outcome or, in
the case of “The Manchurian Candidate,” differentiate two treat-
ments of the same story, we should now return to our central topic
of the good director.
    I hope that I have not suggested that there is a single approach
to being a good director. On the contrary, how good a director will
be depends upon how far the director goes in his realization of the
director’s idea. Before providing a case study of the good director,
I would like to address the diversity among good directors.
    First not all directors are exceptional in every area. Essentially,
the areas of opportunity are performance, visualization, and text


                                                       The Good Director
