Ford devotes much of the narrative to characterizing Holliday as
a man of culture and education. When a Shakespearean troupe
comes to Tombstone and the main actor is undone during a per-
formance by ruffians, it is Holliday who completes the actor’s
Shakespearean soliloquy. The arrival of Clementine in Tombstone
does not particularly advance the narrative, although she does add
yet another touch of civilization to the uncivilized Tombstone. In a
sense, she provides an outlet for Wyatt Earp’s yearning for a more
settled life. Although Clementine and Wyatt Earp do not form a
love relationship, her presence in the film shows that Earp is not
simply a man of justice but one who has hopes and dreams. Ford
used Wyatt Earp’s relationships with Doc Holliday and Clementine          139
to humanize his character. Although Holliday is a killer, he is capa-
ble of deep sentiment. Although Clementine is a refined Eastern
woman, she has the strength to stay in Tombstone in spite of being
rejected by her fiancée. These three characters and their contradic-
tions give rise to the heart and feeling embedded in “My Darling
Clementine.” Depicting this reservoir of humanity in the midst of
the Wild West was Ford’s goal in his interpretation of the story.
    I do want to mention one additional quality of Ford’s interpreta-
tions. In the midst of tragedy and darkness, Ford always sought out
humor. Again, the goal was to humanize characters and plot. In
“The Searchers,” one of the darkest Ford films, Ford has a character
named Mose Harper, who was taken by the Indians. He was spared
from torture and death by pretending that he was mad, although
Mose’s presentation throughout suggests that perhaps it was not
entirely an act. When Ethan figures out that the Comanche Indians
stole the cattle to draw out the men to carry out a murder raid, Mose
does an Indian war dance. Mose is also present when Ethan discov-
ers the bodies of his brother and sister-in-law. Ford made him pres-
ent for most of the hard moments in “The Searchers” to lighten the
mood. This combination of tragedy and humor is another charac-
teristic of Ford’s approach to text interpretation.
    Turning to our excerpts, two make the point about straying from
the main story line or plot. In “My Darling Clementine,” one of the
most famous sequences is a Sunday morning service on the site
where a church is to be built (see L. Anderson, About John Ford,
Plexus, 1981). In this scene, Clementine accompanies Wyatt Earp to
the service, which really is not a service. No minister presides, and


                                          John Ford: Poetry and Heroism
