the woman while the men take the money. The hostage, Lena,
becomes more important in the story as she begins to obsess
about Christa. One of the robbers, Wolfgang (Friedrich Kaiser), is
quickly captured by the police while Christa and the other robber,
Werner (Marius Müller-Westernhagen), escape by train. They begin
a journey to find a friend who can launder the money so they
can turn it over to the daycare center so they can continue to care
for the children. First, they visit Hans (Peter Schneider), a pastor.
Hans refuses to launder the money, although he is quite taken
with Christa. They visit Ingrid (Silvia Reize), a school friend. Ingrid
is willing to help, but the daycare center will not take the money.
In the meantime, Lena has begun looking for Christa and will do           265
so throughout the film.
    When Werner is killed by the police, Hans helps Christa leave
the country using Ingrid’s passport. Ingrid joins her in Portugal.
The townspeople who are conservative interpret their close rela-
tionship as a lesbian relationship and consequently turn against
them. Returning to Germany, Christa is picked up by the police,
and Lena is brought in to identify her as the female bank robber.
She denies Christa was the robber and the film ends. Christa is
free. The excerpts we will focus on are the scenes of Christa with
Lena in the bank and, at the end, Christa with Ingrid and Christa
with her daughter. What characterizes all of these scenes is the
closeness of the females, one with the other. It is a man’s world,
and, whether it is Werner or Ingrid’s husband, men are more self-
ish and in the end they support one another rather than their
female lover or partner. It is the women who help one another.
That was the motivation for Christa to rob a bank. Daycare is an
issue for women. Men care about cars, money, and having sex.
They are not very generous to women. Although Hans is kind, his
interest in Christa seems to be sexual, and he is the most principled
of the men in this film!

“Marianne and Juliane” (1981)
“Marianne and Juliane” is the story of two German sisters. The film
begins with the son of Marianne (Barbara Sukowa) being delivered
to her sister Juliane (Jutta Lampe) for safekeeping. The film ends
with Juliane trying to take care of Marianne’s son. By now his father,
Wolfgang, has committed suicide, as has his terrorist mother. And


  Margarethe Von Trotta: Historical Life and Personal Life Intersect
