the most powerful tool a director can use to link screen characters
      and the audience. Motion promotes energy, identification, and
      excitement. It is no wonder that subjective camera movement is the
      core shot of thrillers and horror films, two genres where victim-
      ization of a character is the core narrative goal.


      Lighting

      Of the various components of a shot that add to the overall char-
      acter of the shot, the most critical is lighting. What does a director
94    have to know about lighting? The best cinematographers are well
      acquainted with lighting issues. In fact, the director should have
      both “macro” and “micro” ideas about the mood he is looking for in
      his film.
          At the macro level, the decision is essentially natural versus dra-
      matic. Film stock, lab instructions, and lighting design decisions
      can all emanate from this directorial notion about the film. With
      the dramatic approach, it is important to decide on a romantic tone
      in the narrative when characters move toward successful achieve-
      ment of their goal or on an expressionistic tone when outcomes are
      in question or are darker. An example will illustrate the point.
      Although Pedro Almodovar’s “Talk to Her” is a dark tale about
      difficult male–female relationships (the women in the two relation-
      ships are both in a coma), the filmmaker is really interested in how
      characters can help each other overcome difficulty, even tragedy, in
      relationships. Consequently, Almodovar used a bright light to
      lighten the heaviness of the narrative and to foreshadow a positive
      outcome. Mike Leigh used a similar lighting strategy to warm up
      “Vera Drake,” a 1950s abortion story; one can imagine how much
      more uptight a naturalistic or cooler lighting design might have
      made the experience of this film. On the other hand, the option
      of natural lighting can yield a documentary realism to a film, such
      as Joshua Marston’s “Maria Full of Grace.” This story about a
      Colombian woman who becomes a “mule” (someone who smug-
      gles heroin into the United States) benefits from the realism of the
      lighting.
          On a micro level lighting can characterize and can foreshadow
      intention; it can be used to soften or toughen the audience’s


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
