and Juliet” to music in modern New York in “West Side Story.” In
that version, the rival families of the Capulets and the Montagues
become rival ethnic gangs, the Sharks and the Jets. The basics of the
tragic story, two young lovers from two opposing sides, remain intact.
    Other Shakespearean plays have been reimagined for modern
times. Jane Smiley’s A Thousand Acres, set in the modern Midwest,
is a retelling of King Lear. The Merchant of Venice has been shifted
from 16th-century Italy to Fascist Italy in the 1930s. Julius Caesar
has also been imagined in Fascist Italy. Modern versions of Othello
have been set in South Africa and in the West Indies. Each of these
versions is making a Shakespearean plot or character relevant to
today and today’s audiences. What is critical is that stories about           75
power and the quest for power, such as Macbeth, can be set in the
Middles Ages in Scotland, for example, but they have just as much
relevance to today. The themes of racism (Othello, The Merchant
of Venice), aging (King Lear), revenge, love, hate, and envy are
as vivid today as they were 400 years ago. This is one of the reasons
why Shakespeare’s stories lend themselves so well to varying
interpretations.
    Turning to other authors, the work of Jane Austen has been
reconsidered for modern treatment. Emma became the basis for
Amy Heckerling’s “Clueless.” Victor Hugo’s Les Misérables was the
basis for the television series “The Fugitive” and later for the
Andrew Davis feature film of the same name. Dickens’ Great
Expectations received a modern treatment from Alfonso Cuaron in
a film of the same name.
    The story of a popular historical character of the West, Wyatt
Earp, sheriff of Tombstone and Dodge City, has been given at least
five different screen treatments. Perhaps the most literal was John
Sturges’ “Hour of the Gun” (1969). That version focused on the
gunfight at the OK Corral and its aftermath. In Sturges’ version,
Earp was not mythologized, and the focus on his relationship with
Doc Holliday was not deep. This version had a documentary-like
feeling that differs powerfully from John Ford’s version, “My
Darling Clementine” (1947). This version depicts Earp as a Western
hero fighting for justice and a way of life different from the evil fam-
ily, the Clantons, who killed his young brother and stole the family
cattle. Here, events have a ritualistic feeling that is both romantic
and elegiac with regard to the West and its values. A third version,


                                                        Text Interpretation
