can move in numerous directions. The tools—text interpretation,
direction of the actors’ performances, and direction of the camera
shots—are applied through the lens of the director’s idea. I would
like to close this book by reconsidering how these tools are used and
to what purpose. Specifically, I would like to suggest that great
directors often use the tools preferentially to achieve a level of feel-
ing that underpins the director’s idea. A director such as Sergei
Eisenstein, for example, uses interpretation and camera more than
he relies on performance, while a director such as Elia Kazan relies
on performance and interpretation more than on the camera shots
and editing style. Both are great directors.
    In this book we have looked at 14 directors. Let’s review those          321
directors who focus on text interpretation and performance in their
films. I would like to suggest that there is an underlying purpose for
such an approach. In the case of Margarethe Von Trotta and
Catherine Breillat, that purpose is political. Both Von Trotta and
Breillat have staked out a specific position in the war between men
and women for equal rights in society. In the case of Von Trotta, the
text interpretation focuses on political action in the community.
A woman commits robbery to save a child daycare center in “The
Second Awakening of Crista Klages.” One sister becomes a terrorist
while the other acts for the environment and women’s rights within
the law in “Marianne and Juliane.” The bedroom is the battle-
ground for Catherine Breillat; whether we look at “Fat Girl” or
“Anatomy of Hell,” the struggle between men and women can be
boiled down to a matter of getting what you want sexually.
    Because the stakes are so high in the work of Von Trotta and
Breillat, much pressure is put on the conviction of the actors. They
have to make the audience believe that their very existence is at
stake. The political dimension of the narratives of these filmmakers
must be communicated by the performers, so charisma as well as
conviction are at the core of the actors’ performances in these films.
In both cases, despite the provocative dimensions of the narrative,
the visuals must follow or take a subordinate position to text inter-
pretation and performance.
    If politics is the goal in the work of Von Trotta and Breillat, the
goal is energy in the work of Elia Kazan and Mary Harron. Kazan
and Harron both favor performance and text interpretation but for
a different purpose. I have already mentioned Kazan’s performance


                                                                Conclusion
