romantic deaths. The camera placement records the moment of
          death more closely to Bay’s interpretation of dying in war, and in
          this sense the camera placement supports a simplified visual
          intention.
              In this discussion of Wincer’s “The Lighthorsemen” I have tried
          to present a positive portrait of competent directors, whose approach
          is straightforward, singular, and consistent when presenting a narra-
          tive that is clear, engaging, and implicitly entertaining rather than
          thought provoking. That is not to say that competent directors are
          not ambitious in their selection of material. Turning to the work of
          another competent director, Adrian Lyne, we can compare his treat-
38        ment of a particular subject matter to the treatment accorded the
          same material by another director. Both Kubrick and Lyne directed
          a version of Nabokov’s novel Lolita. Kubrick’s version (1962) of an
          older man falling for an underage nymphet is filled with irony,
          humor, and a subversive point of view. Lyne’s version (1994) is a lit-
          eral treatment of an older man falling in love with a teenager.
          Lyne’s version has neither humor nor irony. It is a melodrama,
          straight and simple, and a tragic one at that, whereas the Kubrick
          version is a commentary on 1950s America and its morality. The
          Kubrick version is as troubling today as it was when it first appeared.
              In 2002, Lyne remade the Claude Chabrol film “Une Femme
          Infidele” (1976) as “Unfaithful.” Again a comparison is revealing.
          Chabrol’s film is the tale of a jealous husband who believes his wife
          is cheating on him. He hires a detective and discovers that she is
          cheating. When he visits the lover, he finds the man likeable but is
          overcome by his anger and kills him. The film then explores his
          guilt and his punishment (he is arrested by the police in the last
          shot). The film is rife with irony. This plain man with a beautiful
          wife just cannot believe that she is devoted to him in the way he is
          to her. His obsession overtakes his life. Perhaps it pushed her away;
          we are not told, but our empathy is with him. We understand him.
          We even forgive his transgressions.
              Adrian Lyne exhibits no such irony in “Unfaithful.” The film is
          shifted to a melodrama about the wife, a woman looking for the
          excitement and thrill of a sexual encounter. She finds it with a
          Frenchman (an indirect reference to Chabrol’s film), and eventu-
          ally the husband finds him and kills him. What is the couple to do?
          Go on as if nothing happened? Confess to the police? We never find


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
