This sense of economy is not intended to convolute the plot with
more twists and turns but rather to exploit each plot device (to its max-
imum). Lubitsch does the same with the stage of the theater in “To
Be or Not To Be.” The stage is a stage, but it also serves as Gestapo
headquarters to be used to trick a Nazi spy. This elegant sense of
economy is no less surprising to the audience than a more elaborate
narrative would be, but its benefit is that it keeps us close to Lubitsch’s
main focus—the chase at the heart of every romantic comedy.
    A second characteristic of the Lubitsch approach to the camera
is that every aspect of production—camera placement, shot selec-
tion, light, art direction—is in support of character and the charac-
ter arc. That means performance is in the foreground and all else is          185
in the background. The result of this approach is that emotion,
hope, desire, and despair are at the forefront while all else falls away.
    A third characteristic of Lubitsch’s films is that comedy is impor-
tant and is the highlight of his films. Generally, comedy is gener-
ated by the characters. Lily takes a call in Gaston’s suite in “Trouble
in Paradise.” Until that point, she has appeared to be a mysterious,
excited woman with too much time and money on her hands. The
call punctures this illusion because her roommate is calling her
about the unpaid rent. Lily the pretender has replaced Lily the pre-
tentious. In the same film, François’ hypochondria and the major’s
military bearing are offset by their adolescent behavior with one
another and with Madame Colet.
    Finally, a few words about Lubitsch and his management of the
dramatic arc. Romantic comedy is not a fast-paced or plot-driven
genre. At its core it is all about the course of a relationship—they
meet, they pursue, they date, and they are together. Lubitsch under-
stood that the joy of the pursuit is the core experience for the audi-
ence. If the audience is cheering for the couple, all the better.
Lubitsch was exceptionally good at charming us into a relationship
with his characters and then using a plot to trip them up. The sell-
ing of the jewels is the plot in “Ninotchka.” Stealing Madame
Colet’s jewels is the plot in “Trouble in Paradise.” Catching a spy
and living to act on the stage again is the plot in “To Be or Not To
Be.” Lubitsch understood that it must all fall apart in Act III if the
audience is to feel satisfaction as the lovers come together at the
resolution. In “Ninotchka,” the lovers are separated in Act III when
she is in Moscow and he is in Paris. In “Trouble in Paradise,”


                               Ernst Lubitsch: The Life Force of Romance
