Text Interpretation

           In order to explore all the aspects of Spielberg’s director’s idea, we
           must first identify portions of the text that support that idea.
           Spielberg tends to explore the various aspects of childhood and
           adulthood and uses filmmaking to visualize his ideas about child-
           hood and adulthood. This point is important here. Spielberg is
           such an active proponent of the joy of filmmaking that the process
           of filmmaking itself almost becomes a character in his work. We
           will save this part of the interpretation for the camera-edit discus-
           sion later.
252            When I speak of childhood, I am referring to a more romanti-
           cized view than we found in the work of François Truffaut. Whether
           dealing with the loneliness of childhood or the joys of childhood,
           Spielberg presents the child as expressive, energetic, curious, and
           always creative. His presentations of adulthood, however, are not fil-
           tered by the same romantic prism; instead, he depicts all the limita-
           tions, disappointments, and loss of idealism characteristic of adults.
           Think of the adult as a disappointed child who is capable of over-
           coming that disappointment, and you have Spielberg’s version of
           adulthood.
               In Spielberg’s interpretation of the main character, the child is
           not isolated or alone as he or she might be in Polanski’s work.
           Elliott may be quirky or unusual in “E.T.,” but he is part of a com-
           munity comprised of his two siblings and his older brother’s
           friends, as well as a tall blonde in the classroom who is clearly more
           interested in him than she is in the classroom activities. Let’s call
           it the community of childhood. Even when the main characters are
           adults, they are part of a community that includes children. Police
           Chief Brody, for example, in “Jaws” is often seen with his two sons
           or worrying about his two sons. In “Indiana Jones and the Temple
           of Doom,” Indiana’s community is a beautiful blonde and a little
           boy. They are in effect his sidekicks and together they stand against
           the antagonist.
               A second feature of Spielberg’s interpretation is that although
           the antagonist is great enough to make a hero of the main charac-
           ter, the antagonist tends to be cartoonish or one dimensional, such
           as the misguided French archeologist in “Raiders of the Lost Ark,”
           the single-minded shark in “Jaws,” and the persistent raptors in


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
