infuses Wyler’s “The Westerner,” Ford’s “My Darling Clementine,”
and Hawks’ “Rio Bravo,” all classic Westerns.
    Mann, however, viewed the West differently. His is a more mod-
ern, far more ambiguous view of the West and of the characters that
populate his films. Lyn McAdam is neurotically obsessed with
killing his own brother, the antagonist. To call him morally ambigu-
ous is to flatter the McAdam character. In a sense, he shares more
values with his brother than he admits. The setting, the West, is
beautiful, but given the narrative and its corruption of the tradi-
tional Western values it is ironic, unpredictable, and dangerous
rather than poetic.
    And now we come to Mann’s director’s idea. In Mann’s take on          53
the Western, the main character is not a hero, not a romantic char-
acter. He is all too human, and he is a man not unlike his antago-
nist. In the beautiful setting of the West, his behavior is ambiguous
rather than idealized. In “Winchester ’73,” we view the main char-
acter’s struggle as a modern one. He is obsessed and he has to
survive to achieve his goal—in this case, revenge against his brother.
When we look at the visualization, we can see that the Lyn
McAdam character is crowded by the very close camera placement.
He is foregrounded. In the background is his adversary, Dutch
Henry Brown, his brother. This conflict, internal and deep, ties him
to his brother. The two men are visually linked together but are
adversaries. The intense close-ups alternate with extreme long shots.
The intensity of the close-ups contrasts with the breathtaking beauty
revealed in the extreme long shots. The beast is in the close-up, and
the beauty is in the extreme long shot. The irony in this juxtaposi-
tion again and again reminds us of the madness of the main char-
acter. If he is heroic, he is at best a tortured hero. This pattern is
repeated in the relationships of the main characters in “The Naked
Spur,” “The Man from Laramie,” and “Men in War.” In each case,
the visual landscape plays the same role: to make ironic and modern
the choices the main character must make. We see the same pattern
in Mann’s noir classics “He Walks by Night” and “Raw Deal.”
Mann’s director’s idea is to examine the moral compromises of his
main characters, and the beauty of his long shots, whether of the
West or Korea or a modern-day main street, deepens that moral
ambiguity.



                                                      The Good Director
