I have titled this chapter “The Camera” rather than “Production”
because the camera conjures up visual images, which are what most
of this chapter is about. A more accurate description might be
production, because in this chapter we discuss camera shot selec-
tion, but we also address other elements that affect the nature of
a shot—light and art direction. We also briefly discuss sound,
another production variable. Late in the chapter we also address the
edit, as many production decisions made are intended to maintain
flexibility for the edit. After the text interpretation, two production
decisions are critical with regard to the material to be edited—shot
selection and direction of actors. We have saved the direction of
actors for the next chapter. In both production and the direction of          87
actors, the choices made are principally driven by the director’s
interpretation of the text.


The Shot

The first decision a director needs to make is whether to use a long
shot or a close-up, although the possible range of shots is even
broader; for example, the director could use an extreme long shot.
Think of the desert shots in David Lean’s “Lawrence of Arabia” or
the battle between the Romans and their slaves in Stanley Kubrick’s
“Spartacus.” The extreme long shot is used to locate action and
tends to be primarily informational. The long shot can include one
person or many. The opening extreme long shots of Robert Wise’s
“West Side Story” locate the action in Manhattan, and long shots
are used to introduce the Jets following the opening. These shots
provide information and identify characters within the location.
The long shot is used to move into and out of a scene.
    The three-quarter shot, or American shot, is essentially a shot
where we see three-quarters of the character. The shot was used pri-
marily in the studio as opposed to location filming. The shot is used
to follow action within the limits of the studio set built for the scene.
Three-quarter shots are used less now than they were in the heyday
of studio production.
    The mid shot is a waist-up shot. It is often used when filming
a conversation between two or more characters—in a car or in a
bar, for example. The mid shot remains informational but it is more


                                                                 The Camera
