The plots and the murders, particularly the threat to the
          prosecuting attorney, rouse Max to stand up and be tested. His
          relationships with the prosecuting attorney and the hit man are
          key. If Max is a mild human being, a dreamer, the hit man is
          intense and aggressive—a man on a clock. If Max seems kind to
          others, the hit man is indifferent and cold to feelings or needs.
          The only thing these two men have in common is the cab, Max’s
          livelihood and the killer’s transportation of choice to get through
          a hard night. The subtext of this film is what will rouse a mild
          man, perhaps even a meek man, to action? The answer is clear—
          survival—as well as Max’s need to save the life of the prosecuting
48        attorney.
              Plot and character, then, are important dimensions of testing
          what kind of man Max is, but Los Angeles at night also plays a
          role. As presented, Los Angeles is all highways and sleek sky-
          scrapers. The few times Max seeks help from Angelinos he is
          either mugged or ignored. Mann’s presentation of the environ-
          ment is that it is cold and hostile. So many people, and yet they
          pass each other in the night and leave Max to his own devices. If
          he does not stand up for himself, no one else will. This is the Los
          Angeles Mann presents in “Collateral,” and it makes the test that
          much harder.
              Finally, we need to address the camera style Mann adopts in
          “Collateral.” Max and the hit man are often shown in close-up with
          the camera placed close to them, as if they were the only two men
          in the world. The environment, on the other hand, is objectified,
          the camera distant. Mann used helicopter shots to look down on the
          city. He also used long shots to track the cab. The point of view only
          shifts when Vincent is doing his job or during an impending crash
          of the cab. At those points, Mann shifted into subjective motion and
          camera placement.
              Even in the climactic scene when the hit man tries to kill the
          attorney but Max rescues her and they attempt to escape via the new
          subway system, Mann alternates close-ups and extreme long shots to
          objectify the confrontation. It is as if the environment (long shots)
          does nothing to help or harm those (close-ups) who pass through it.
          By doing so, Mann is suggesting that, if you can make it through
          a night in Los Angeles, you can and will survive anywhere. And
          Max does.


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
