The second relationship in the film is between the male nurse
       and a comatose female dancer. He was so taken with her in life that
       he became a patient of her father, a psychiatrist, in order to see her.
       Later, after an accident, she becomes the nurse’s patient. He is very
       happy to care for her. He is a man in love, but late in the narrative
       he rapes her. She becomes pregnant and eventually awakens from
       her coma. Prior to her awakening, the male nurse is imprisoned
       and, seeing no hope, commits suicide.
           The third relationship is between the journalist and a female
       bullfighter he interviews. They begin an affair that is suddenly inter-
       rupted when she is gored by a bull. Her injuries are so severe that
66     she remains in a coma for a long time. In this phase, the fact that
       both the journalist and the male nurse have someone they love in a
       coma brings the two men closer together. They have grown very
       close when the bullfighter dies. At this stage, the two men console
       one another. The film ends by suggesting the beginning of a fourth
       relationship—between the journalist and the now-awakened ballet
       dancer. They see each other at a dance performance, and the film
       ends where it began.
           This story summary does not do justice to the director’s idea. All
       aspects of being a man and of being a woman are explored. The per-
       formance helps blur gender distinctions. The caring exhibited by
       the male journalist for the male nurse, the emotionality of the male
       nurse, the cerebral character of the dancer, and the masculine
       professional aura and personal hysteria of the bullfighter all blur
       gender lines.
           As in “All About My Mother,” the art direction and camera
       choices in “Talk to Her” are sunny and lift the film away from the
       tragedy of the events in the film. In both films, Almodovar has chal-
       lenged fixed ideas about men and women—cultural, sociological,
       and political. He has created characters that move us, and their sto-
       ries help us redefine how we view gender in our own societies.
           Denys Arcand is a Quebec filmmaker whose early work in doc-
       umentary was quite political. For over 30 years he has been making
       feature films that increasingly have moved away from strictly politi-
       cal subject matter. Since 1987, with “The Decline of the American
       Empire” (essentially a comedy of manners), Arcand has focused on
       values rather than politics; yet, in some ways, his films since then
       have never been more political.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
