payback by performing fellatio upon him. The fact that he could be
aroused encourages her to make her four-night proposal. This scene
has violence and feeling. The four nights that follow show the woman
objectified, naked and passionless, and raises the question of whether
a homosexual can choose to become heterosexual. The ending leaves
itself open to numerous interpretations.


Text Interpretation

It is clear that Breillat has strong views about women in society and
that she has chosen sexuality as her prism for examining that issue.        295
Implicitly, she wants to empower women but as can be the case with
artists she is offering a challenge to prevailing social stereotypes that
women are passive and demure about their sexuality, that sexuality
is biological and instinctual, and that sociological and psychological
discussions about sexuality (the intellectualization of sexuality) have
created an aura of pathology around sexuality that she feels is sim-
ply wrong. Breillat also is interested in linking paradoxes to sexual-
ity—pleasure and pain, man and woman, self and other,
propagation and non-purposeful sexuality.
    In order to get us to think about the ideas in her films as well as
to feel engaged in a film experience, she uses her text interpretation
to distance us from her characters. She tells us very little about
Marie in “Romance.” For example, does she have parents or sib-
lings? All of her history is stripped away and we are left with a young
woman trying to deal with her boyfriend. The austere narrative,
focusing only on sexual encounters, also distances us from
Marie. Ironically, Breillat focuses on Marie in the most intimate
of moments, sexual encounters, and yet we do not really understand
Marie.
    This characteristic is taken to an extreme in “Anatomy of Hell,”
where both the woman and the man she hires have an abstract qual-
ity. They are simply a woman and a man. Information about the
woman is implied. Clearly, she is a woman of means, as she hires
the man and they meet at a villa by the sea. Again, Breillat strips the
characters down to essentials, to stereotypes, rather than creating
complex characters, to further her ideas about sexuality and the
power struggle between the woman and this man.

                           Catherine Breillat: The Warfare of Sexuality
