the future course of Russia. They represent duplicity, deceit, and
exploitation. To fight them, Ivan creates a personal guard, the
Oprichnicki, who will be the instrument of his will. Ivan will be
betrayed by both his closest friends—Kurbsky, who goes over to the
Poles in the west, and Phillip, who chooses to retreat to the east and
enter into the priesthood. Both friends ally themselves with the cause
of the Boyars. Ivan becomes czar by virtue of his will but must resort to
the cruel exercise of power to retain his position. Betrayal is all around
him, in his court as well as the country at large. Part I of “Ivan the
Terrible” depicts the abandonment of Ivan by his friends; because of
the death of his wife, at the end he is alone except for the Oprichnicki.
    Part II of “Ivan the Terrible” charts the psychological transfor-        125
mation of Ivan from monarch to murderer. Abandoned by everyone
from his childhood, including his friend Phillip, Ivan turns to
eliminating his betrayers, particularly his aunt Efrosinia and her
son Vladamir. Boyars are executed, Efrosinia loses her son and her
power, and Ivan is victorious, but his world seems to have gone
mad. Victory is at best empty, for Ivan remains very much alone.
    In each of these films, the conflict is elevated to momentous
proportions with considerable historical implications. It seems as
though Eisenstein wanted to point out that history is created out of
such struggles. At no point does Eisenstein suggest a more benign
view of the historical process. It is all about conflict.


Directing the Actor

In terms of directing actors, Eisenstein relied heavily on casting. In
“Potemkin,” beyond Vakulinchuk there is no single character whose
screen time requires a performance. Even in the case of Vakulinchuk,
only frustration, anger, and indignation are required, and then he is
killed. Instead of seeking out actors with a range of skills, Eisenstein
was casting for a particular look—in fact, a stereotypical look, such as
the intellectual, the obedient child, the adventurous child, the ele-
gant grandmother, the middle-class mother, the peasant mother, the
aggressive Cossack, the cigar-chomping businessman, the snobbish
officer, the peasant sailor. Subsequent to the casting, Eisenstein relied
on editing, primarily the juxtaposition of shots, to create feelings
about these characters and their fates. In this sense, the performance


                              Sergei Eisenstein: The Historical Dialectic
