benefits of a world that is power oriented, the white world. As such,
Father Henri represents the best values of the Church in the world,
the spiritual values of piety and valuing others in life.
    The performances are in keeping with the director’s idea. The
tormented Father Henri fluctuates between spiritual strength and
human weakness. With the exception of the Norwegian priest,
the other performers dwell in the material world where power is
everything.
    Schlondorff is very interesting in how he uses the camera to pre-
sent the two worlds of the director’s idea. The black world of Dachau
is shot in telephoto lens, and the background is compressed, pushing
the people in the images together such that they are less individual-     17
istic and more herd. We learn they are priests. The camera looks
down upon the mass, and the camera angles rob the characters of
individualism and dignity. They are victims and we watch as they are
victimized. Intense close-ups bring Father Henri and the SS into
emotional and cruel conflict. The intensity makes this black world
threatening and devoid of humanity.
    When Father Henri is in Luxembourg, long shots replace close-
ups and wide-angle shots provide a clear context for the white world.
The solid church, the powerful Gestapo headquarters, even the
graveyard where Father Henri’s mother is buried seem to belong to
a different world than Dachau. Here, Schlondorff is deepening visu-
ally our sense that black and white live side by side, yet one is hell
and the other is heaven, the powerless versus the powerful. His exe-
cution of the director’s idea helps transform this simple story into an
emotionally alive and vivid experience.
    A second example is Cedric Kahn’s “Red Lights” (2004). Again,
the story is simplicity itself. A rather ordinary man has a successful
wife—an attractive corporate lawyer. They have two children. The
entire film is occupied with their setting out from Paris to pick up
their children from a camp holiday in Bordeaux. The journey itself
is the focus. The husband drinks, waiting for his wife and their jour-
ney to begin. Whether or not he is jealous and why he might be is
unexplained, but he is troubled and alcohol empowers him. Driving
like a wild man he becomes increasingly provocative. At his second
drink stop, she abandons him for the train. He tries to catch the train
but cannot. Again stopping for a drink, he picks up a young one-
armed stranger who has asked him for a lift. The main character


                                                       The Director’s Idea
