Patrick Bateman, the main character, narrates. He provides
           superficial information, including his age. We see his menacing
           preparations to get ready for work (morning ritual—exercise, shav-
           ing, bathing). He is all surface. Later, at work again, he is obviously
           superficial. He holds the position of vice president for mergers and
           acquisitions at Pierce & Pierce. His secretary flatters him, clearly
           under his influence, but Patrick could not care less about her.
               We learn that Patrick has a fiancée, Evelyn (Reese Witherspoon)
           and a mistress, who happens to be his colleague’s fiancée, Courtney
           (Samantha Mathis). We also learn that Patrick can talk the
           talk (social concerns over materialism) to his colleagues, but in
308        practice he is a fraud. He feels that he is “simply not there” and that
           his day-to-day life is out of alignment with his internal life, which
           seethes with aggression and need (he sees himself as a sexual and
           societal predator). Outwardly, however, his colleagues are far more
           predatory and effective.
               At the top of the peer group is Paul Allen (Jared Leto), who does
           not even recognize Patrick. He mistakes him for someone else, a
           colleague who wears similar suits and glasses and goes to the same
           barber. Patrick’s crisis occurs at a meeting where he presents his
           business card to claim his status in his peer group. David Van Patten
           (Bill Sage) and Timothy Bryce (Justin Theroux) present their cards
           and each is a blow to Patrick. The final blow, however, is the obvi-
           ous superiority of Paul Allen’s business card. Patrick has been put in
           his place. The business card incident is his Waterloo. From this
           point on, Patrick falls apart; he is crushed and the balance of the
           film is concerned with the consequences of this blow.
               What follows is Patrick’s descent into a kind of mad rage. First,
           he encounters a homeless person. Initially patronizing, Patrick ends
           up killing the man. This killing is followed by an encounter with
           Allen. They arrange to have dinner, but Allen still mistakes who
           Patrick is. Later, at Allen’s apartment, Patrick murders Allen with
           an axe and gets rid of the dismembered body. Patrick meets period-
           ically with Detective Donald Kimball (Willem Dafoe), who is look-
           ing into the disappearance of Allen. The purpose of these scenes is
           to put pressure on Patrick for his murderous actions. Patrick’s sexual
           appetites grow. He alternates between his mistress and prostitutes.
           His fiancée seems increasingly demanding and unloving. His
           resentment of her grows. When Patrick engages two prostitutes for


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
