The characters in “The Decline of the American Empire” are
adult intellectuals who want to fulfill their desires—sex, food,
drink—and they are critical of a society that focuses on social orga-
nizations (family, church, state) rather than on the individual. This
brings us to Arcand’s director’s idea. For him, the artist, who may be
an academic or an actor, has an obligation to challenge society, to
challenge all of the -isms. For the artist, values are a moral shield
against materialism, against intellectual dogma, against political
dogma. The artist represents the satisfaction of desire and a respon-
sibility to care for another (lover or friend or fellow citizen). In his
later films, such as “Jesus of Montreal” (1995) and “The Barbarian
Invasions” (2003), Arcand’s director’s idea is presented full force.          67
Because the latter is a sequel to “The Decline of the American
Empire,” we turn to it first.
    The artist in “The Barbarian Invasions” is the same academic we
met in “The Decline of the American Empire,” but now he is dying
of cancer, and the film ends shortly after his death. This is not a film
about dying, though. The main character is his son, an economic
success story. The son hates his father for leaving the marriage (at
the end of the previous film). Upon his mother’s urging, however,
he comes back to see his father. The couple’s other child, a young
woman, has escaped to a sailing life in the South Pacific. The son
returns to Canada to find a health system falling apart. He seeks an
opinion from a childhood friend who is now a cancer specialist in
the United States; however, the father refuses to die in the United
States. He wants to die in Canada surrounded by friends—and sex,
food, and wine. The son buys comfort for his father, bringing in his
friends from abroad and providing heroin for his pain. By helping
his father legally and illegally, the son discovers that there is more
to life than economic success. We leave the son moved and per-
plexed about his own future (and his values).
    What is interesting about this film is that Arcand takes a cue
from Woody Allen. Arcand’s characters speak to us directly as they
criticize all the intellectual and political trends of the academic’s
life. By doing so, Arcand leaves us with the impression that the love
that these friends (male, female, gay, heterosexual) have for one
another is the real life, the worthwhile life, while the -isms of life are
transitory and unimportant, just chatter in the overall scheme of
things.


                                                         The Great Director
