A second unique characteristic of Lubitsch’s work is that the pur-
           suit of a love relationship seems to occupy the entire universe of his
           characters. Nothing else seems to matter and all else falls away. What
           this means for the experience of his films is a kind of unique inten-
           sity. His characters have no past and they will have no future if the
           relationship fails. The result is a focus on the present quite unlike the
           experience of most films. Although the films are comedies, they have
           an intensity quite unique in the experience of screen stories.
               A third quality of Lubitsch’s films is that they are quite sophisti-
           cated. The people have lived not in a fishbowl or an idealized state
           such as Frank Capra’s Mr. Smith in “Mr. Smith Goes to Washington”
178        (1934), or Ben Hecht’s cynical Walter Burns and Hildy Johnson in
           Howard Hawks’ “His Girl Friday” (1938). The consequence is that his
           characters have a lived-in quality, a zest for life that is recognizable
           and attractive. A bonus of this characteristic is that when Lubitsch’s
           characters speak it is a pleasure to listen to them. Often written by
           Samuel Raphaelson, the dialogue in a Lubitsch film is as pleasurable
           as in the films of Billy Wilder and Joseph Mankiewicz.
               In the excerpts discussed here, I have decided to focus on the
           first meeting of the opposites whose relationship will carry us
           through the film.

           “Trouble in Paradise” (1932)
           “Trouble in Paradise” opens in Venice. At the outset, a robbery
           occurs in a luxury hotel. The scene we are focusing on occurs after
           the robbery. An elegant nobleman (Herbert Marshall) awaits a
           woman whom he has invited to dine with him in his rooms. He is
           distracted by the preparations and directs the waiter to make sure
           the champagne is perfect and the food enticing, but he also wants
           the waiter to disappear as quickly as possible. When the woman
           (Miriam Hopkins) arrives, the two joust with one another as the
           waiter reports the robbery down the hall to them. A phone call inter-
           rupts, and we learn that the woman is not who she is pretending to
           be. The nobleman accuses her of picking his pocket, and she in
           turn accuses him of robbing the man down the hall. Each returns
           the items stolen from the other—he returns her garter and she
           returns his watch and wallet. They reveal their identities—he is the
           famous Gaston Monescu and she the thief Lily—and they declare
           their love, becoming partners instead of victims.


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
