as “The Wild Child” (1968) and “The Man Who Loved Women”
       (1977). Each category seems to have its own stylistic approach, with
       the child films being the most playful and unfettered in their stylistic
       choices. This latter group is the focus of this chapter.
          In this chapter we will discuss excerpts from “The 400 Blows,”
       “Stolen Kisses,” “Love on the Run,” and “Day for Night.”

       “The 400 Blows” (1966)
       “The 400 Blows,” Truffaut’s first feature film, was the first film in the
       Antoine Doinel series, which starred the same actor, Jean-Pierre
       Léaud, over a 20-year period. Through four films and a short,
206    Truffaut followed Antoine from troubled adolescent to confused
       adult. Through parenthood and sundry relations, the boy in the
       man defeats adult concerns and Antoine remains difficult and
       eccentric and boyish to the last. In “The 400 Blows,” we meet the
       adolescent Antoine. The film chronicles his difficulties at home and
       at school. Because of a petty theft he is sent to a juvenile evaluation
       center. The film ends with his running away from the center. The
       sequences we will discuss are the opening and the closing of the
       film. The film opens in the classroom. The strict teacher is irate
       when he discovers Antoine is focused on a pinup picture rather than
       the class work. He forces Antoine to stand behind the blackboard
       while the other students go out for recess. When the students
       return, the teacher returns to the assignment. Antoine’s assignment
       will be punitive (he is asked to write multiple times a declaration of
       what he will not do in the future), and the recitation assignment for
       the rest of the students is a poem the teacher puts up on the black-
       board. While the teacher is writing on the blackboard, Antoine
       silently makes fun of him. Many of the other students also begin to
       misbehave and rebel against the strictness of their teacher. In this
       excerpt, Antoine is playful and rather angelic, not particularly angry.
       The last scene of the film begins at a soccer match at the juvenile
       detention center. Antoine knows he is to be sent to a more severe
       juvenile facility, and he runs away. He is pursued by the soccer
       coach but eludes him. He runs down to the sea, and by the edge of
       the water he slows down and turns toward the camera. A freeze
       frame of Antoine ends the film. This sequence is open and filled
       with movement, while the opening school sequence was static and
       closed.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
