and the outer action. Both Valerie Solanas and Patrick Bateman
act as their own narrators, the inner confessional voice of their
narratives. The actions of the two characters, on the other hand,
aggressively pursue actions that increasingly marginalize them,
psychologically and socially. That is not to say that Harron wants
to portray these characters as losers but rather as perennial out-
siders. They are like the rest of us in a celebrity-obsessed society,
outsiders looking in on what they imagine they want. It is
Harron’s twist to point the emptiness she sees inside celebrity
society. This ordinariness and its meanness rob the celebrity soci-
ety of its romanticism, and the films suggest that perhaps Solanas
and Bateman are at least feeling people as opposed to the zombie-         311
like visitors to the Factory and the 1980s glamorous New York
restaurants.
    A third strategy Harron uses in the text interpretation is to pep-
per her tragic narratives with humor. Foreign journalists interview
Factory hangers-on about the shooting of Andy Warhol. The
remarks, tinged with irony, point out the interviewer’s pompousness
and the interviewees’ envy of Warhol’s status. The readings of
Solanas from her manifesto are so inflammatory that they seem
unintentionally funny, which makes them even funnier. Bateman’s
retort to his racist, sexist colleagues makes him seem to be New
York’s last moralist. Both the comments of his colleagues and
Bateman’s moralizing are wildly funny given that in his mind
Bateman is a killer of blacks, women, and vice presidents in his
company.
    Finally, a sense of time and place is critical in Harron’s text
interpretation. There would have been no Valerie Solanas without
the sex- and drug-obsessed New York of the 1960s, and there would
have been no Patrick Bateman without the “greed is good” philoso-
phy of 1980s New York, a time when junk bonds and brand names
in all things from soap to suits were the epitome of making it.
Harron weaves the sense of time and place throughout her films;
indeed, they transcend individualism and the love–work nexus that
Freud placed at the center of his interpretation of happiness. The
culture of narcissism that thrived in the 1960s and 1980s is about as
far away from the positive goals and attainments of those eras as is
possible. And these are the worlds of Valerie Solanas and Patrick
Bateman.


                                    Mary Harron: Celebrity and Banality
