serious films with comedy (think again about Woody Allen as well
as Billy Wilder).
    My point here is that each director has a distinct personality that
makes the work of that director different from the work of others.
Part of the pleasure derived from films is their diversity, which con-
tradicts the notion roaming around too many halls of film education
institutes that there is one right way to make a film. My feeling is
that there are many right ways, depending on the character, beliefs,
and interests of the specific filmmaker.


How Did We Get Here?                                                           5

Directors were not always the central figures they are today. As
Hollywood developed into an industry, stars and producers were far
more important than directors. David Selznick, a studio executive,
became an important producer; consequently, he is the central creative
figure associated with “Gone with the Wind.” No one remembers the
four directors and as many writers on the film. When one speaks about
“Casablanca,” it is Bogart and the Epstein brothers, the writers, who are
remembered rather than Michael Curtiz, the director. Otto Preminger
and Joe Mankiewicz both began their ascent in the film industry as pro-
ducers. Both later made their mark as directors. Billy Wilder began as
a writer, as did Preston Sturges. There were important directors in
Hollywood (such as John Ford, Frank Capra, and Howard Hawks), but
whenever possible they also acted as producers of their films. Even
today, Jerry Bruckheimer and Brian Grazer are important producer
figures in the industry. So, how did the director become so important?
    The pivotal event occurred in France rather than in Hollywood.
There, critics such as François Truffaut, Claude Chabrol, Eric
Roehmer gathered around the journal Cahiers du Cinema, under
the editorship of André Bazin. In post-war France, they studied and
wrote about the creative genius of John Ford, Howard Hawks, Alfred
Hitchcock, Anthony Mann, and Sam Fuller. They considered these
American filmmakers to be the auteurs of their films, and they crit-
icized the structure and output of their own French film industry.
They began to make their own films—independent, low-budget
films in the freer style characteristic of American cinema. The effect
of their adulation was revolutionary, as directors came to be widely


                                                                Introduction
