not responsive to practice the violin so he can become a great musi-
       cian. If he does not practice he will fail and become a music critic.
           From the opposite train Colette, holding Antoine’s book, Love
       and Other Troubles, tries to get his attention but succeeds only in
       catching Alphonse’s attentions. He alerts his father that a woman on
       the other train is a spy. Antoine does not pay much attention to what
       his son has said and says goodbye to his son. As he turns to leave, he
       finally sees Colette, whose train has started to pull out of the station.
       As she sees him notice her, she holds up the book. That does it for
       Antoine, and he dashes onto the departing train, although Colette
       does not see him do that.
208        In her sleeper cabin she reads the book, and the film cuts to clips
       from “Love at Twenty,” which focused on their relationship 16 years
       earlier. The clips include Antoine’s first sighting of Colette at a con-
       cert, his anxieties about approaching her, and meeting the parents
       for dinner. It also includes an excerpt of Antoine becoming a neigh-
       bor of Colette’s family. The clips then move through Antoine’s rela-
       tionship, courtship, and failed marriage to Christine. All are
       included in Antoine’s book. Finally, the porter brings Colette a
       note. Someone is waiting for her in the dining car. She is certain it
       is Xavier; instead, she finds her old boyfriend, Antoine. And here
       our excerpt ends.

       “Day for Night” (1972)
       The last excerpt is from “Day for Night,” Truffaut’s film about film-
       making. The film chronicles the production of a film, which is the
       plot of the film, although it focuses on the relationships of the actors
       and crew. Old stars and new actors mix with the crew in what can
       only be described as a soap opera. The handsome older Alexandre
       (Jean-Pierre Aumont) decides after many marriages that he is gay.
       The great Italian actress Severine (Valentine Cortese) cannot
       remember her lines. The young actor Alphonse (Jean-Pierre Léaud)
       is so needy and childish that he is unpredictable and unreliable.
       The foreign star Julie (Jacqueline Bisset) is fragile, hardworking,
       and generous to the point of getting herself into emotional trouble.
       The director (François Truffaut) has nightmares about the work of a
       director against whose work he measures his own. The joke here is
       that he compares himself to, who else, François Truffaut. And the
       crew acts according to stereotype—the stuntman is a stud, and the


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
