“Giant” (1956)
       “Giant” tells the two-generation story of the relationship between
       Leslie Litton (Elizabeth Taylor) of Maryland and Jordan Benedict
       (Rock Hudson) of Texas. The story of their marriage, their life in
       Texas, and their disagreements about race and the role of women in
       society makes “Giant” more than a regional story. The differences
       between their two individual sets of values come to a head in the
       lives of their children. The more liberal Leslie succeeds in changing
       her husband from a man who sides with the prevailing social views
       about race into a man who will fight for the dignity of his half-
       Hispanic grandchild. The excerpt that I will focus on here is the
152    funeral scene for Angel Obregon, a Hispanic Texan who has died in
       World War II and whose body has been returned to Texas for burial.
       The scene has special meaning because earlier in the film Leslie
       was able to get medical attention for the sick baby of one of the
       Hispanic workers on the Benedict ranch, Reatta. The baby whose
       life Leslie saved was Angel Obregon.




       Text Interpretation

       For George Stevens, it was critical that a main character be posi-
       tioned to optimize the director’s idea. This means that desire has to
       resonate powerfully in his main character. Alice Adams wants to get
       ahead in a small town that has labeled her a “have not.” Whether
       this makes her a social climber or simply a person who is desperately
       ambitious (the American character) depends on the point of view.
       The upper class of the town views her as a social climber, but her
       parents see her as an unappreciated jewel of a person.
           In “A Place in the Sun,” desire is embedded in George
       Eastman’s character. He wants a better life, and he wants the love
       of his life. Again, conscience resides in the upper crust (his own
       family) of the town. “Slow your advance or don’t join us,” speaks the
       actions or wishes of his rich relatives.
           Stevens went to considerable lengths to have the audience iden-
       tify with Alice Adams and George Eastman. Alice is exceedingly
       thoughtful and supportive of her father, a character with rough
       edges. Similarly, George Eastman is so rejected by his family that he


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
