a motivation that will make her risk humiliation, even death, in
       order to secure her love relationship with the Jew, Fabian, and also
       create a mother/child bond with Ruth. These scenes proceed in the
       light of insult from Gestapo officers (Lena is “a Jew-loving whore”),
       the rejection of her father, and the prostituting of herself with
       the SS hierarchy. All of these commitments are measures of self-
       sacrifice for love.


       Text Interpretation
268    Margarethe Von Trotta is above all a political filmmaker. I use the
       term political in the sense that her stories are about personal
       transformation and political action, not in the formal sense, but
       the actions of an individual to change her interaction with the soci-
       ety. Von Trotta has made films that are more literally political, a film
       such as “Rosa Luxemburg,” for example, about the Spartacist leader
       killed by the German army during the 1918 workers’ revolt against
       the government of post-World War I Germany. Each of the four
       films I talk about in this chapter focuses on personal and political
       action. In “The Lost Honor of Katharina Blum,” Katharina, a shy,
       modest woman with firm middle-class values, becomes a murderer
       to defend herself against an exploitative journalist and the police
       and legal officials whose authoritarianism is all about their empow-
       erment to the detriment of the rights of an individual such as
       Katharina Blum. Von Trotta sidesteps the love story, the melodrama
       of a woman trying to make her way in Germany, and the terrorist’s
       story, to focus on Katharina’s transformation.
           In “The Second Awakening of Christa Klages,” Christa takes
       action to subsidize a daycare center and its children. Clearly, the
       daycare center has been forsaken by conventional government
       funding and the fate of the children has become precarious.
       Transgression on behalf of children comprises the political action in
       “The Second Awakening of Christa Klages.” In “Marianne and
       Juliane,” both sisters have already taken political action as the film
       begins. Marianne is a terrorist wanted by the government. Juliane is
       a leftist reporter focusing on women’s issues and environmental
       issues. The deeper political action, however, moves away from
       the paternalistic model that is religious and conservative. The


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
