exploration. In “Fat Girl,” an older sister has her first sexual encoun-
ters in a room where her younger, obese sister is trying to sleep.
A teacher explores sadomasochism with her headmaster in
“Romance.”
    Breillat is also interested in exploring the role of women as
sexual predators, role reversal in a sense. Fifteen-year-old Alice is
curious and sexually aggressive in “A Real Young Girl.” In “The
Anatomy of Hell,” a woman is the sexual initiator of a paid rela-
tionship with a homosexual. Indeed, Breillat is also interested in
turning other sexual stereotypes on their head, such as the homo-
sexual participating in a heterosexual encounter in “The Anatomy
of Hell,” the sexual desire of an obese teenager in “Fat Girl,” the         291
anti-stud behavior of the male actor who has to perform a sex scene
in a film in “Sex Is Comedy.” Breillat is challenging all of these
stereotypes.
    Having suggested the ambition of Breillat in her work, I feel we
need to also point out how she has set many limitations on the nar-
rative and speculate as to why. “Anatomy of Hell” has in essence
two locations—a club where the two characters meet and a house
by the sea where they have their nocturnal encounters. “Sex Is
Comedy” has two settings—the beach, where an exterior scene is
being filmed, even though the weather is the opposite of what one
might expect, and a set where the interiors are being filmed, which
seems almost summer-like. “Fat Girl” is set in a southern resort
town off-season. Half of the screen time for this film is spent in the
shared bedroom of the two girls. The second major setting is the
car, a Mercedes, which the mother uses to transport her daughters
in the second part of the film to their home outside Paris. The
limited number of settings is used to position the films as interior
narratives rather than as stories about characters out in the world.
Breillat also limits the settings in order to create a sense of ritual or
metaphor for her characters. The opposite, seeing her characters in
a more varied, normal diversity of circumstances, would normalize
our sense of the characters. They would be safer, more familiar. As
it is, the characters present as strange, even menacing. I believe
Breillat would consider them more pure characters.
    This is an appropriate point to return to Breillat’s director’s idea.
Her films are about sexuality as a power struggle between men and
women. In her films, therefore, there has to be a sexual goal. It


                           Catherine Breillat: The Warfare of Sexuality
