This chapter is all about the relationship of the director with the
actor. Because the actor is the most direct expression of the direc-
tor’s idea, it is critical that the director understand the actor as well
as the critical synergistic relationship of the director and the actor.
An analogy that is appropriate here is the therapist–patient relation-
ship. I do not mean this in the sense of a confessional relationship
but rather a creative one. When it works, the therapist and the
patient together create a pathway to a “new” person who is more
actualized and more present in the world. In this sense, a good
director and his actor create a pathway (i.e., performance) to a new
person—the character in the film. That character will bring alive
the narrative and create yet another relationship—with the audi-            105
ence. These creative, compelling relationships are what audiences
seek. It is the reason why good actors are so well paid, and it is the
reason why directors who do not use actors to their fullest potential
are less well paid. I would like to add that actors are the frontline in
a production. They take the greatest personal risk, and their courage
deserves the audience’s respect and, dare I say it, love. They are an
important partner in the creation of a film and in deployment of the
director’s idea.


Casting

Many directors believe that “cast right and half of your job as a
director is accomplished.” The statement at best is a half-truth. In
this era of star-making projects, the politics of finance as often as a
director’s vision dictate casting. The rise of powerful agents and cast-
ing directors have moved the pendulum in the direction of political
rather than creative casting. My comments that follow are only rel-
evant to creative casting (let me just say that directors must continue
to fight to maintain their vision of the characters in their films).
    Casting is the first expression of the director’s idea before
production begins—all the more reason why the director at this pre-
production stage must have a clear director’s idea, which, at this
stage, is based on an interpretation of the script. The casting process
is first and foremost about the look of an actor. Whether or not the
actor physically conforms to the director’s vision of the character is
less important than a checklist about the qualities, both physical


                                                                   The Actor
