but we do not see his face until the end of the scene. In this sequence,
Eisenstein focused on the symbols of power—the scepter; God’s repre-
sentative, the Bishop, who endorses Ivan’s czarship; the individual
Boyars who resist his czarship; his wife, who is the only character who
will support Ivan; Efrosinia, his aunt, who will be the primary Boyar
antagonist; and the two princes, Kurbsky and Phillip, who ostensibly
support Ivan but in the end will betray him. The scene offers some
sense of hope when these two princes shower Ivan with gold coins to
wish him good fortune in his reign. All of these characters and their
actions are presented in close-ups. The pace of the scene implies hope,
but Eisenstein’s juxtaposition of those who are hopeful and those who
will stand against Ivan introduces the conflicted character of the rest of     133
the screen story. The scene ends as Ivan turns to the camera and for the
first time we see the young czar, his face and his eyes. He is hopeful and
innocent, the polar opposite of what he will become.
    Notable is Eisenstein’s use of light to cast shadows on the
enemies of Ivan and light upon Ivan and his young wife. The oppos-
ing forces are created and positioned in visual opposition to each
other. The juxtaposition is emotional—hope versus skepticism,
good versus evil. Eisenstein in this scene has created the opposi-
tional elements of the czar and the Boyars that will dominate the
film throughout both Parts I and II.
    In this chapter, I have focused on particular scenes that illustrate
the director’s idea, the historical dialectic, and conflict as historical
determinism. Eisenstein uses text interpretation, performance, and the
camera to animate his director’s idea. What I have not yet noted, but
do so now, is that great directing is about transformation of a film expe-
rience into something larger, deeper. Eisenstein was able to powerfully
shift our experience of “Potemkin,” “Alexander Nevsky,” and Parts I
and II of “Ivan the Terrible” as stories of a naval revolt and its aftermath
or Russian leadership in the 13th and 16th centuries into life-and-death
struggles between humane and barbaric values. To do so, he
unleashed the power of editing, the aesthetic payoff of visual compo-
sition, in pursuit of his passion for the medium and for his country.
Conflict is at the core of Eisenstein’s narratives, but it is hope that
Eisenstein embraced—the hope that good can overcome evil, and
when it cannot, as in “Ivan the Terrible, Part II,” then at least under-
standing and compassion can be extended to a man who has experi-
enced so much evil in his life that he has become its ultimate victim.


                               Sergei Eisenstein: The Historical Dialectic
