Directors who are very conscious of the issue of voice and for
whom their views supersede any dramatic considerations often opt
for voice-oriented story forms—specifically, satire, docudrama, fable,
and nonlinear stories. Each of these genres uses distancing strategies
such as irony to detach our identification and emotional involve-
ment with the main character. Structure also is used to distance us
from the main character. The viewer watches without emotionally
identifying with the character. The relationship between the director
and the viewer is more direct, as it is not mediated by the viewer’s
emotional relationship with the main character. Voice is the most
direct vehicle for the development of the director’s idea.
    To say that marketing does not play a role in the development of         335
a director’s idea would be disingenuous. Aside from voice, marketing is
a most conscious deliberation during development of a director’s idea.
For the director, it can be the single most influential factor. Sensation
sells tickets. Sensation may be generated by plot, by a sexual subtext, by
a violent subtext, or by an over-the-top tone or style. Excess and com-
mercialism seem partnered in the work of Quentin Tarantino (“Kill
Bill”), Bernardo Bertolucci (“The Dreamers”), John Woo (“Mission
Impossible II”), and Adrian Lyne (“Fatal Attraction”). Marketing can
be a powerful shaping force in the development of the director’s idea.


Choosing the Director’s Idea
Now that you have completed a full script analysis and decided
which aspect of the story has pulled you into the story, you have five
options for choosing the director’s idea. Each provides a different
pathway; focus on one of the following:

   1. The character arc—The main character and his or her trans-
      formation are the vehicle.
   2. The dramatic arc—The plot is the driving force. The struggle
      of the main character and the antagonist determine the direc-
      tion and shape of the dramatic arc
   3. A subtextual idea—A narrative can be straightforward (e.g., the
      romantic nobility of “King Arthur”) or complex (e.g., “Silence
      of the Lambs”). By making the subtext prominent, the charac-
      ter arc and dramatic arc are subsumed by the subtext.


                                     Appendix: Finding the Director’s Idea
