response is, in fact, a primal scream). Tone is all about the specific
images that create the romanticism or terror so central to the narra-
tive. As is so often the case in literature, metaphor can make a point
more powerfully than can more obvious shots. This is why directors
such as the Coen brothers and Schlondorff so often utilize it.

The Main Character
It is important for the director to realize that the audience
experiences the narrative through a main character. That means the
director must decide how he wants us to feel about that character. It
may be ambivalence—such as for George Clooney’s character in
“O Brother, Where Art Thou”—or it may be understanding and                   101
compassion—such as for the two main characters in Alexander
Payne’s “Sideways.” In both cases, the characters are mischievous,
manipulative, mopey, even dopey, but in each case the director
has moved us toward a very different relationship with the main
character. What if a choice is not made? Films for which this is the
case include Michael Winner’s “Lawman” or Michael Anderson’s
“Force 10 to Navarone.” In neither film is the audience able to
establish an emotional relationship with the main character, and
the result is indifference to the screen story. For an audience to be
fully engaged in a director’s film, understanding or even loving the
main character is key.

Conflict
Drama is conflict; without conflict, an audience is put in the
detached position of observing rather than becoming involved;
consequently, a director must be mindful of providing sources of
conflict in the story. This sense of conflict can be generated
between characters or between characters and the environment.
Conflict goes to the heart of the dramatization of the director’s story.

Story Form
Finally, shooting with a distinct sense of genre is important to the
final edit. Every story form has a particular character who serves as
a signpost for the audience. The stylized quality of film noir, the
romanticism of the Western, the dark expressionism that chokes off
hope in the horror film—all of these characteristics identify and
breathe life into a film. By understanding story forms, the director


                                                                The Camera
