(Darrell Zwerling), a city official responsible for the Water
       Department. His wife, Evelyn Mulwray (Faye Dunaway), did
       not hire Gittes; instead, it was an actress claiming to be
       Mrs. Mulwray. Gittes is being set up as is Mulwray. Gittes does
       find Mulwray keeping company with a very young woman. In
       short order, he is being sued by the real Mrs. Mulwray, and
       Mr. Mulwray, after witnessing various Water Department irregu-
       larities, is murdered.
           Gittes, threatened in every direction, is hired by the real
       Mrs. Mulwray to find out what happened to her husband. What
       Gittes discovers is that someone is diverting water from Los Angeles
222    to the Valley and also buying up land in the Valley. The trail leads
       to Evelyn Mulwray’s father, Noah Cross (John Huston). Cross in
       turn hires Gittes to find Mulwray’s young mistress.
           At this point, Gittes get emotionally involved with Mrs. Mulwray
       and quickly discovers that her dead husband’s young mistress is
       Evelyn Mulwray’s sister and soon thereafter finds out that she is also
       her daughter. Siding with Mrs. Mulwray, he tries to help her escape
       with her daughter/sister. In Chinatown, all the parties come
       together and Evelyn Mulwray is killed by the police. Although
       Noah Cross killed Hollis Mulwray, he is wealthy and gets away with
       the murder and with his young daughter. Gittes is tragically unable
       to prevent harm to his new love, Evelyn Mulwray. He is led away by
       colleagues as the film ends.
           The sequence we will focus on is the growing intimacy of Jake
       Gittes and Evelyn Mulwray. Just as he is taken with her, she receives
       a call. She asks him to trust her and says that she will return soon.
       He shatters one of her tail lights and follows her. He sees her drug
       Hollis Mulwray’s young mistress. He confronts her in her car, and
       she confesses that the young girl is her sister. He believes her, but
       he is set up by the police to bring Evelyn Mulwray in for question-
       ing in the death of Ida Sessions, the actress who initially imperson-
       ated Mrs. Mulwray to hire Gittes. She is also suspected of killing her
       husband. When Gittes confronts her she reluctantly tells him that
       the young woman is both her sister and her daughter. She then
       confesses that she willingly had sexual relations with her father; it
       wasn’t rape. She is crushed by the admission. Although Gittes prom-
       ises to help her, he in fact has initiated a chain of events that will
       lead to her death.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
