from World War I. The main character, Larry Darrell, has sur-
vived the war but finds that he is not able to settle down, get mar-
ried, and lead the good life in Chicago. He is eager to regain a
sense of purpose in his life. This state leads him to Europe and
then to India and back to Europe. In Paris, he encounters some
of his Chicago friends, including his fiancée, now married, who
has never stopped loving him. His friends do not understand him,
but he now has a better understanding of himself and his friends.
Without bitterness, he tries to help them. Larry survives as a
deeper person and moves on in life. His friends, each in different
ways, become casualties of a material life. His spiritual depth and
strength help Larry to go on. The Razor’s Edge exemplifies what               79
I would call an internal story. Other writers whose books or plays
lend themselves to interior treatments include Flaubert’s
Madame Bovary, Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina, Nabokov’s Lolita,
Marber’s “Closer,” and Shepard’s “Fool for Love.” Directors who
like to deal more with the inner life include Roberto Rossellini
(“Voyage to Italy”), Luchino Visconti (“The Leopard”), and
Darren Aronofsky (“Requiem for a Dream”).
    An alternative approach to a text reading is to focus on the exte-
rior, the outside of things, and imply the interior. When one thinks
of the exterior of things, Frederick Forsythe’s The Day of the Jackal
and Mario Puzo’s The Godfather come to mind. Exterior readings
or interpretations do not make every film look like “Jaws” or
“Lawrence of Arabia,” but this approach does put a premium on
action with regard to characterizations and story arcs. A good exam-
ple of this kind of novel is Yann Martell’s The Life of Pi, the story of
a shipwreck that leaves a boy, the main character, and a Bengal tiger
together in a lifeboat. Will the boy survive, given that he is a poten-
tial source of food for the tiger? Another novel that spills over with
external events is Phillip Roth’s The Human Stain, about a black
man pretending to be a Jew who is fired from a college for a racist
remark to a black student.
    Other works that focus on external events include Shakespeare’s
Henry V, Tolstoy’s War and Peace, and Mel Brooks’ “The Producers.”
Each of these works, from “The Godfather” to “The Producers,”
could focus primarily on the psychology of the characters or on
the actions that shape the characters’ behavior, or the focus could
be on both. Directors who seem to have a strong sense of external


                                                        Text Interpretation
