Neff embraces and then kills her. Again, the polarity amplifies the
idea that everything is at stake.


Directing the Actor

   “A director who can crack jokes about suicide attempts
   (‘Sabrina’ and ‘The Apartment’) and thoughtlessly brutalize
   charming actresses like Jean Arthur (‘Foreign Affair’) and
   Audrey Hepburn (‘Sabrina’) is hardly likely to make a
   coherent film on the human condition.” —Andrew Sarris
   (The American Cinema, University of Chicago Press, 1968)                   169

Andrew Sarris is not an admirer of Billy Wilder’s directing skills, as
he placed him in the fourth rung of his directorial pantheon, “Less
Than Meets the Eye.” There Wilder is in good company with Elia
Kazan, David Lean, Joe Mankiewicz, and William Wyler. This is
not the point at which I launch a vigorous defense of Wilder’s work.
I believe my inclusion of Wilder in this book states my own view of
his work. Rather, I use the Sarris position to begin our exploration
of Wilder’s work in light of performance. What was he seeking in his
direction of performances? And how do the performances amplify
the director’s idea that the very existence of his characters is at stake?
    To understand Wilder and his expectations of actors, it is clear
that he and his collaborators wrote roles that required confident
actors. This explains the very public difficulties he encountered with
Jean Arthur and Marilyn Monroe; nevertheless, he secured from
Monroe her best screen performance in “Some Like It Hot.”
The roles often positioned the main character as an outsider in his
particular situation—William Holden’s opportunistic, unpatriotic
prisoner-of-war character in “Stalag 17,” Jack Lemmon’s small-fish-
in-a-pool-of-sharks character in “The Apartment,” and Kirk Douglas’
aggressive, big-city reporter in the boondocks of New Mexico in
“Ace in the Hole.” These roles required actors who could work in a
marginalized dramatic space and amplify their actions to have an
impact beyond their confines, physical and emotional.
    Wilder had a penchant for mixing icons from directing as well
as acting with the rest of the cast. On the surface, this might seem
arrogant but in fact it worked. Examples include a bevy of silent


                                           Billy Wilder: Existence at Stake
