and immerse himself in another reality. In the case of the other
       characters, their dreams are less humanistic, more regressive and
       aggressive. Only Eric remains the most human of the four charac-
       ters, and the film ends with a close-up of him and Tess together.
       Rickard and Geko seem to be victims of their own anger and disap-
       pointment in life. The two youngest, Tess and Eric, suggest a mod-
       icum of hope for the future; both proceed wounded but less scarred
       by their experiences. The excerpt I will use from “A Hole in My
       Heart” is the opening. As the four characters are introduced,
       Moodysson uses a jumpy style to capture the fractured nature of the
       four lives of the characters that will populate “A Hole in My Heart.”
282

       Text Interpretation

       The director’s idea, empathy and its limits, gives rise to the presence
       of empathy and contempt in Moodysson’s character interpretations
       and the pressure points of plot and character that prompt change. In
       a sense, the director’s idea creates a pathway into the narrative. In
       “Fucking Åmål,” the main character, Elin, is bored. She is attractive
       and energetic and passionate. Her openness and her insensitivity
       commingle to make us wary of empathizing with her. In the pro-
       gression of her relationship with Agnes we can see her shift from
       poseur and experimentalist to a more authentic person. Her energy
       and authenticity make Elin an empathic character. To elevate that
       sense of empathy Moodysson communicates a gentle contempt
       toward the well-meaning parents, toward the cruelty of adolescent
       boys, and toward the need to conform found among the school pop-
       ulation at large.
           In “Together” Moodysson is most empathic to Eva and Stefan. It is
       the children who suffer most in a family breakup. The gentle con-
       tempt is amply spread around the adult population. Göran is chided
       for his idealism, Lena for her promiscuity, Anna for her exhibitionism,
       and Eric for his rigidity and his anger. The contempt is not so great as
       to squeeze the charm out of these characters, but it is a presence.
           Empathy is at its most poignant for Volodya and Lilja in “Lilja
       4-Ever,” and contempt is at its height when aimed at Geko and
       Rickard in “A Hole in My Heart,” but both empathy and contempt
       are operative in each of these films. What is clear is that Moodysson


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
