in fighting her fate is surprising and speaks to her inner strength as
       an actress. Nastassja Kinski as Tess also comes across as a beauti-
       ful victim, although hers is a far more interior resistance. As a reli-
       gious person, she is struggling with the dissonance between her
       own morality and the morality of others. In each case, the moral
       authority is vested in men who betray her. In the case of Adrien
       Brody as Wladyslaw Szpilman, Polanski has again cast for a surface
       vulnerability and expressiveness that imply the ultimate victim.
       Once again, though, the will to survive is a reflection of the inner
       conviction and drive of the actor. The talent to convey that inner
       drive for survival is the key to Brody’s successful Oscar-winning
228    performance.
           Beyond casting, Polanski seems actively interested in sidestep-
       ping the “star” personality of some of his actors. He did not exploit
       the star image of Jack Nicholson as Jake Gittes; instead, he
       seemed to work against it. He worked Nicholson hard to create a
       sympathetic portrait of a man who has been emotionally wounded
       in the past and is trying to avoid a repeat. The result is a sensitive
       portrayal of a man trying to be honest in a dishonest world.
       Polanski did the same with John Cassavetes in “Rosemary’s Baby.”
       Working with Cassavetes’ bad boy image, he made the character
       Guy a narcissist, an opportunist, a man willing to throw over his
       wife for his career. The portrayal in this case took advantage of
       Cassavetes’ Hollywood image as being difficult and counter-
       Hollywood. By having a cynic play a narcissist, Polanski and
       Cassavetes created a role that is bigger in feeling than it would
       otherwise be.
           Finally, Polanski gives each actor a specific note to play, a key to
       the performance. Rosemary is the mother or the wannabe mother
       throughout. The test for her is whether she will still be motherly
       when her baby is born. Jake Gittes is the professional with a heart of
       gold. In a sense, Polanski directed Nicholson as if he were a gener-
       ous hooker, and of course Nicholson’s character ends up paying the
       price for his heart of gold.
           In the case of Tess, she is an innocent, a child in life forced into
       the cruel adult world. She tries to retain her innocence through all
       of her ordeals, but in the end the cruelty of the adult world drives
       her to murder and to her death. Szpilman is forever the musician.
       Music is the beauty in his life; it is what he holds onto until the end,


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
