surprised by the arrival of his rage at the moment of murder. For the
       purposes of our discussion, Lyne represents a competent director
       and Chabrol a good director.
           The good director adds value to a project through his text inter-
       pretation, direction of the actors’ performances, and camera deploy-
       ment, creating surprise and a subtext that deepens our experience
       of the film. In Chapter 4, I focused on the work of Anthony Mann,
       a director known principally for his Westerns. In Mann’s
       “Winchester ’73,” the surprise is the dynamic deployment of the
       environment to reveal how morally ambiguous the main character
       has become. The classic Western positions the main character as a
318    moral hero and the antagonist as morally reprehensible, but this
       dynamic does not operate in “Winchester ’73,” as both the main
       character and his antagonist are humanized. The humanity of each
       is compelling, and the genre expectation shifts. The subtext in
       Mann’s work is rather modern compared to the classical pastoral
       sense of the West; consequently, the film proceeds toward resolution
       without the optimistic sensibility of the classic Western. To com-
       pensate for this shift, Mann provides a visual aesthetic that is
       dynamic and powerful. The real hero of his films is the artist, Mann
       himself, who takes us on a visual rollercoaster ride that is quite
       unforgettable. He does so in his war films as well as his film noir
       films. Visual power and disappointed characters are a potent mix in
       the experience of a Mann film.
           If the good director uses a counterpoint approach to layer our
       experience of the film, the great director deploys his own voice to
       transform our experience of the film. The vehicle for that voice is
       the director’s idea. As I mentioned in Chapter 5, particular charac-
       teristics mark the work of the great director. The level of passion in
       the work of the great director is unusual. The great director stakes
       out a distinct position on a subject or character in the film, and
       there is a simplicity in his approach as well as economy in the nar-
       rative. Much is achieved in a single shot. Finally, there is a distinc-
       tive style in the work of the great director.
           A useful comparison of good directors and great directors is
       provided by the two versions of “The Manchurian Candidate.”
       I suggested in Chapter 4 that the more recent example of “The
       Manchurian Candidate” directed by Jonathan Demme is an exam-
       ple of good directing. By deploying an aggressive, intense camera,


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
