Introduction

The opposite of empathy is contempt, and you can find both in the
brief but powerful career of Lukas Moodysson. “Together” with Tom
Tykwer of Germany and Catherine Breillat of France, these film-
makers represent a powerful new voice among directors. Bold,
uncompromising, experimental, each of these filmmakers has
quickly made a mark comparable to that of Martin Scorsese in the
United States and Wong Kar Wai in Asia. In this chapter, we will
look at the four films made by Moodysson in Sweden: “Fucking
Åmål” (called “Show Me Love” in North America; 1998), “Together”
(2000), “Lilja 4-Ever” (2002), and “A Hole in My Heart” (2004).           275
    In terms of the director’s idea, Moodysson is examining in each
of these films extreme characters, and in each film he is looking for
a way to empathize with that character or characters. Before going
into the characters and the films, a discussion about empathy would
be useful. Of the other directors I have described, probably the most
similar to Moodysson with regard to empathy are Ernst Lubitsch
and Margarethe Von Trotta. In George Stevens’ work, the goal was
to have the audience merge with the character, which is something
beyond empathy. In the work of John Ford, the characters are
iconic, larger than life—easy to admire but difficult to identify with.
Creating empathy was not a goal of either of these directors.
    Both Lubitsch and Von Trotta deeply care about their characters,
and they do not mind flaws in them. In fact, the flaws are important to
convey a complexity, a realism to the character. This is what I mean
by empathy, which can be found in realistic characters that we can
recognize and find either contemptible or admirable—characters
operating with strengths and weaknesses and a passion. These are the
qualities we find in the characters of Lukas Moodysson.
    There are limits to empathy, however, and those limits begin to
translate as soft satire when they are mildly expressed and downright
anger and contempt when they become forceful. In Lubitsch, we see
the soft satire in nearly all the films. The married couple—the great
actor Joseph Tura (Jack Benny) and the even greater actress, his wife
Maria (Carole Lombard)—in “To Be or Not To Be” are both credible
and empathic—he in his jealousy and she in her guile; both are the
source of Lubitsch’s soft satire about the narcissism of actors.
Similarly, Von Trotta empathizes with the older sister (Jutta Lampe)

                                Lukas Moodysson: Empathy and Its Limits
