A second characteristic of Breillat’s interpretation is to make a
       main character passive, watching rather than actively working
       toward achieving a goal; instead, the action is focused on other char-
       acters. In “Fat Girl,” Anaïs observes her sister. She does act out her
       sexual curiosity and eat, but the action is driven by her beautiful
       older sister and her sexual relationship with Fernando. Anaïs even
       observes the killing of her sister and mother as if she is outside the
       action of the film. In “Sex Is Comedy,” as a director, Jeanne is in a
       similar position. The actor and actress will perform for the camera,
       and the cameraman and art director and costumer are all essential
       to the film being made. They all have active roles to play, and
296    Jeanne struggles with how to make the film her own, to materialize
       her vision. She manages in the end but she is for the most part a
       person watching and trying to capture the energy of all the other
       participants, particularly the actors.
          Finally, Breillat resorts to shock to make her point about sexuality
       and the warfare between men and women. When I use the term
       shock I mean it in the same way I used the term narrative exaggera-
       tion earlier. Kubrick often used narrative exaggeration to make his
       point, as did Bunuel. Breillat’s metaphors are not as elegant as
       the cowboy riding a nuclear bomb to its target, but they are equally
       powerful. In “Anatomy of Hell,” the woman mixes a cocktail—part
       blood-red tampon, part water—and the two characters drink it.
       I have earlier mentioned the penis prosthesis in “Sex Is Comedy,”
       and the multiple vaginal examinations Marie is subjected to in
       “Romance” are another example of the Breillat shock tactic. These
       moments are all presented in a visually pleasing surround that is
       every bit as light and beautiful as watching an Almodovar scene.


       Directing the Actor

       Breillat casts for a particular look—an obese 13 year old and her
       beautiful 15-year-old sister in “Fat Girl,” a film director who has a
       sensual as well as a cerebral look in “Sex Is Comedy,” a boyfriend
       who is better looking than his girlfriend in “Romance,” and an
       actress and actor who are sensually beautiful, archetypically so, in
       “Anatomy of Hell.” Breillat does not invite her actors to work within
       a wide range of emotions. Anne Parillaud in “Sex Is Comedy” is an


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
