duel is staged that leads Barry to believe that he has killed the
captain. He leaves home, never to return. This is the last sense of
youthful innocence Barry Lyndon will experience.

“Full Metal Jacket” (1987)
The third excerpt we focus on is the sniper attack from “Full Metal
Jacket” that occurs in the latter part of the film. The film breaks
down into two phases: basic training and combat. In basic training,
we watch Joker (Matthew Modine) and his fellow recruits become
a unit of killing machines, as the master sergeant characterizes
them. The sequence ends with the most continually humiliated
recruit (Vincent D’Onofrio) killing the master sergeant and              237
himself. Basic training is over. The film then shifts to Vietnam and
primarily focuses on the Battle of Hue. The platoon has just lost its
lieutenant and is now being led by Cowboy (Arliss Howard). The
platoon is nervous and lost. A soldier is sent to scout a way forward
and is wounded by a sniper. When he is shot again another soldier
goes to his rescue, but he, too, is shot, and both end up dead
because no tanks are available to come to their rescue. As the
platoon moves up closer to the sniper’s position, Cowboy is shot and
killed. The rest of the platoon moves in for revenge. They wound
the sniper, a young woman. As they gather around her they decide
to let her die from her wounds. Joker is particularly conflicted
because the young woman is now begging to be killed. Finally, he
shoots her. The sequence ends as the remainder of the platoon
returns to combat.

“Eyes Wide Shut” (2000)
The final excerpt I will use is the opening sequence of “Eyes
Wide Shut” (2000). Screenwriter Frederic Raphael wrote an
intriguing memoir on his work with Stanley Kubrick (Eyes Wide
Open, Ballantine Books, New York, 1999). It offers insights into the
Kubrick process and is especially meaningful as Kubrick died just as
the film was released in North America in 2000. The film, provoca-
tive as any of Kubrick’s works, is a cautionary fable about the limits
of narcissism. William Harford (Tom Cruise) is a New York physi-
cian with a beautiful apartment and a beautiful wife, Alice (Nicole
Kidman). His problem is a gnawing dissatisfaction with his life. Is
his wife bored and keen on an extramarital affair? Why do his rich


                         Stanley Kubrick: The Darkness of Modern Life
