The mother is humbled but not destroyed. She has grown in her
understanding of what it means to be a mother. Love was always
there, but now patience, empathy, and something almost intangible
or spiritual complements the sense of love she experienced at
the outset of the story. The character arc is a coming-of-age arc, as
the woman has matured over the course of the story. We can view the
plot as the progression of the disease and the efforts of the mother
and father to work with doctors to find a cure for the disease. The
director’s idea in “Lorenzo’s Oil” is the power of the will as a force of
nature. The doctors say the child will die, but the son the mother
waited so long for simply cannot die. She will not allow it. The pres-
ence of will in her behavior, in her husband’s efforts, in the African      23
people among whom the son grew up is a surprising and palpable
force in the outcome of the film. And will is the surprise that in the
end changes the plot and allows the discovery that saves Lorenzo, the
child, thus altering the character arc. The character arc and the role
of surprise can be vehicles for realizing the director’s idea in a film.
By exploring the character arc and what will provoke change, the
director can discover the device that will become the director’s idea.
    When the director has found an idea in the text interpretations,
this director’s idea can then be used to shape the performances and
organize shots to serve the idea. The design of the edit will use
these shots to integrate the text interpretations and performances
with the director’s idea. Deciding on a director’s idea can only be
arrived at through conscious examination of script and an aware-
ness of the director’s own priorities as a storyteller. Using text inter-
pretation as the vehicle for defining the director’s idea will further
articulate what the director needs from the actors and from the
camera to realize the director’s idea. (See the appendix at the end
of the book.) Now that the director’s idea has been conceptualized,
it is time to consider how directors deploy these ideas, but first we
must define what constitutes competent directing, good directing,
and great directing.




                                                        The Director’s Idea
