In this book, I am going to say many things about technique, about
directors, and about directing. To persuade the reader that what
follows is not simply esoteric, abstract, and academic, I would like
to use this chapter to demonstrate that the views presented in this
book are conceptual in their framing but practical in their goal. The
goal is to help readers become better directors by utilizing the con-
cept of the director’s idea. What needs to be said at the outset is that
there are all kinds of directors: intuitive directors, self-conscious
directors, dictatorial directors, laissez-faire directors, directors whose
agendas are political, and directors who are utterly commercial and
exploitative in their intentions.
    In order to develop our understanding of directing, we must               13
consider three broad areas of decision making that are critical to
defining the type of director: (1) text interpretation, (2) attitude toward
directing actors, and (3) how the camera is used (e.g., shot selection,
camera angle, shape of the shot, point of view of the shot). Beyond
those areas is the issue of whether the director’s decisions add value to
the project. What I am proposing in this book is that there are three
categories of such decision making: competent, good, and great. To
understand directing, each level of decision making must also be
clearly understood; accordingly, the next three chapters address the
concepts of competent, good, and great directing.
    In each case, the consciousness of the director’s idea is where
progress begins. The competent director conveys a singular attitude
about the script, be it romantic, violent, or victorious. The good
director conveys a more complex, layered vision of the narrative.
The great director transforms the narrative into something surpris-
ing and revelatory. Each of these options exists. Only the ambition
of the director can elevate the audience’s experience.
    The goal of this book is to illuminate the pathway from basic to
great. We can assume that the director consciously chooses a direc-
tor’s idea, which implies an awareness about the directorial choices
that must be made and a sense of what constitutes better directing.
This is not a matter of intellect or personality. It is far more about
conscious goal setting and moving along a pathway to achieve that
goal. The opposite view, which has its proponents, is that art (includ-
ing directing) is mysterious, subconscious, intuitive, and therefore
impossible to articulate. My approach in the book is to embrace
what I believe to be the source of art making: consciousness. The


                                                          The Director’s Idea
