must be seen as transient and as less important than deeper com-
munal values and spiritual values. It is telling that Arcand positions
a priest, society’s bearer of spiritual values, as one of the antagonists
in this film. Once again, the organizations of society have failed the
individual. The artist as radical voice upholds the spiritual values
that Arcand associates with Jesus in “Jesus of Montreal.”
    Emir Kusturica is a Muslim who has made the majority of
his films in Serb Orthodox Serbia. Kusturica’s director’s idea is
to portray the Middle Eastern male personality by exploring its
vitality, its creativity, and its self-destructiveness. From “When
Father Was Away on Business” (1986) through “Underground”
(1999), Kusturica has explored all aspects of maleness, but probably         69
no single film presents a more hopeful arc than his “Time of
the Gypsies” (1992). “Time of the Gypsies” tells the story of Perhan,
a gypsy adolescent raised by his grandmother. His choices are
simple—to be a caregiver like his grandmother or to be a man like
his uncle, a worker who has returned from Germany. All his uncle’s
relationships have failed and his compulsive gambling is all but
ruining the family. The narrative follows Perhan through work and
helping his crippled sister, marriage to a childhood sweetheart, his
sexual paranoia about her, her death in childbirth, betrayal by his
benefactor, his murder of his benefactor, and his own death at
the hands of the benefactor’s family. At the end, his son will be
raised as he was by his grandmother.
    Superstition, passion, and paranoia are mixed in with youthful
idealism, and in the end Perhan succumbs to the male disease of
jealousy, which leads to hatred and violence, thus destroying the
idealism that was there in abundance when Perhan was an adoles-
cent. It is as if Kusturica was trying to portray a life with a slow-
release poison embedded in it. When enough poison is released, the
life ends, a fate that is inevitable.
    The director’s idea is presented in such a way that, as the narra-
tive unfolds, Kusturica gives full rein to each of the feelings. In the
early scenes (visually and in the performances), we perceive the ide-
alism. These scenes are funny and charming. As the narrative shifts
rather abruptly to paranoia, dark actions and dark visuals replace the
earlier sunny tone. Performances are modulated differently so as to
be appropriate to this layer of the Middle Eastern male personality.
Each phase of the film requires a different tone. When we pull


                                                        The Great Director
