A Case Study in Good Directing: Michael
Mann’s “Collateral”
Michael Mann films cross numerous genres and seem to test the
core values of their main characters, whose very existence depends
on their behavior in a crisis. The lone thief, Frank, in “Thief” (1981);
Hawkeye in “The Last of the Mohicans” (1994); Neil, the criminal,
and Vincent, the detective, in “Heat” (1996); and Jeffrey, the
informer and Lowell, the producer, in “The Insider” (1998) are
all tested, and each gives up a great deal in order to survive, if
indeed the character does survive. Director Mann’s efforts to lay
                                                                            47
bare the primal or true character of his main characters and their
antagonists reflect his director’s idea of viewing life as a test.
Whether a character is honest or dishonest, professional or amateur,
capitalist or environmentalist, the narrative is set up to test his
beliefs and the depth of those beliefs. Only in the test can we meas-
ure the man. This is Mann’s director’s idea. In this, Mann is closest
to Howard Hawks, as each used genre to explore the man.
    What this means in a film such as “Collateral” (2004) is that
Mann sets up the main character as someone who has reached
stasis in his life and has both dreams and fears; all is in balance.
Mann uses an antagonist and plot to challenge the main character.
The environment in Mann’s films is never neutral and is not
enabling for the main character; if anything, it makes the challenge
all the greater.
    In “Collateral” the narrative is simple. The main character,
Max, is a black man who has been cabbing in Los Angeles for 12
years and dreams of owning his own luxury limousine company.
The evening begins simply with a young attorney as his fare. She
is concerned about how long it will take to reach her office. Max
remains low key and confident, and by the end of the ride the two
have formed a bond. The next fare is far more direct when he asks
Max if he wants to make $600. All he has to do is drive him to five
meetings. Max agrees and the night from hell begins. His fare,
Vincent, is a hit man, and as Max will learn target number five is
the young attorney who will be prosecuting a case against a drug
kingpin the next day. The others are the witnesses, and the hit
man must kill them all.


                                                        The Good Director
