as well as style of acting also contributed to the director’s idea. With
           regard to text interpretation, Eisenstein approached his screen
           stories in a particular fashion. “Strike” (1924) examines the conse-
           quences of labor rebelling against management, with the govern-
           ment not mediating but rather aligning with capital against labor.
           The historical struggle is specific, conflicted, and framed as
           exploitation versus moral or human values. The struggle becomes
           tangible as well as metaphorical as it devolves into evil versus good.
               A similar interpretive pattern follows in “Potemkin” (1925), which
           tells the story of a naval mutiny in 1905 in the seaport of Odessa.
           Here, again, the mutiny is framed in terms of exploitation—the
124        sailors are the victims, and their officers enrich themselves by
           providing bad food rather than decent provisions. One sailor,
           Vakulinchuk, assumes a leadership role and is the catalyst for
           the mutiny. His death in the struggle makes him a martyr for his
           fellow sailors and the sympathetic population of Odessa. Sailors
           and the townspeople become the decent, moral social element
           while the officers of the ship and businessmen of Odessa and the
           Czarist troops become the exploiters, the parasites, the evil embod-
           iment of their leaders, as the military attacks the civilians and
           sailors. The conflict between good and evil is underway.
               In “Alexander Nevsky” (1937), a 13th-century narrative, the main
           character is Alexander Nevsky, a prince of the Russian hinterland. In
           the east, Russia is under attack by the Mongols; in the west, the
           Germans have invaded the Ukraine. Nevsky, having already defeated
           the Swedes, is a natural leader. He chooses to defend the city
           Novgorod against the advancing Germans. Nevsky is good and strong;
           his people are simple, virtuous, and dogged, both men and women.
           The Germans, aided by Russian opportunists, are authoritarian,
           cruel, and evil. Once again the interpretation is a struggle between
           good and evil, and the characters are archetypal rather than realistic.
               Perhaps the most complex narrative Eisenstein undertook was “Ivan
           the Terrible.” Originally intended as a three-part film, in fact only the
           first two were completed. Part I of “Ivan the Terrible” (1943) is the 16th-
           century narrative of the czar who united Russia. Based in Moscow, the
           film begins when Ivan is crowned czar. The film ends with the funeral
           of his wife, poisoned (as he will learn in Part II) by his own aunt.
           Although Ivan faces enemies in the east and the west, his larger
           enemies are his own noblemen, the Boyars. They want power over


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
