compassion. Working with these contrasting notions, Ford created in
           the hospital a metaphor for life during wartime; that is, life shines
           brightly but is surrounded by darkness. The metaphor is powerful
           and poetic.
               This kind of stylized light was also used by Ford in “The Grapes
           of Wrath.” Muley’s story begins in the Joad home. Tom Joad has just
           returned from prison to find his parents have been displaced from
           their home. The Joad home has no electricity. Only candlelight
           reflects on Joad, the preacher, and Muley. Each is presented in
           close-up. The candle sheds a narrow, flickering band of light, and
           the high contrast adds drama to the faces of these characters and the
146        story we are about to hear.
               Muley’s story is told in two distinct scenes. In one, Muley and his
           family are told by a sheriff that they will have to move. He wants to
           know who he can shoot to stop this process. The sheriff tells him
           that the bank in Tulsa is responsible to its shareholders and has
           ordered the house to be torn down. The Tulsa bank is a faceless and
           soulless antagonist. In the next scene, the mules and tractors come
           to tear down the house. This time, Muley, shotgun in hand, faces a
           more tangible enemy. The operator of the tractor is another neigh-
           bor. When Muley asks him how he can do this to a neighbor, he
           says he’s doing it for the $3 a day. He has his own family to feed. He
           bulldozes the house and Muley, in tears, picks up some dirt and
           mourns how many of his family have died for this piece of land
           which is now no longer his.
               The scene is presented in stylized long shots. Muley and his
           family are nailed to where they stand. In the early light, the shad-
           ows Muley and his family cast are long and dark. There are
           very few shots in each scene. The morning shoot provides high
           contrast, bright whites and blacks. The formality of the images
           is rooted in a higher-than-eye-level camera position. The camera
           looks downward toward these victims of a faceless antagonist.
           Ford holds the shots, including the shot of Muley in tears and
           clutching the dirt of what was his farm. The passion of the char-
           acter and his determination are heroic, and the tragedy is all the
           more powerful. It is not a political tragedy, as it was in Steinbeck’s
           novel; rather, it is a human tragedy. By using a poetic visual
           style Ford elevated these scenes above the political character of
           the novel.


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
