look but her role as Lena in “Rosenstrasse” required her to be very
forceful. The softer, more sexual side of Lena is an important
presence in her character.
    Beyond the look of the actor, Von Trotta looks for a reservoir of
passion. All of the characters described here are believers. Marianne
believes in revolution, Christa Klages believes that transgression
in the name of a principled position is right, and Katharina Blum
believes in middle-class values and an orderly society until she is
pushed to change. Passion that can lead to action is a fundamental
dimension of each of these performances.
    Another dimension of these performances is that each of these
women takes risks; she goes to the edge. If they succeed they live,       271
but each knows they may have to go further and put their lives at
risk. This willingness to take risks has to be part of the performance.
It certainly goes to the heart of Barbara Sukowa’s performance as
Marianne, the terrorist. We believe she can kill or be killed or kill
herself. When she argues with her sister she is always pushing her
to join her and risk it all. The performance is striking with regard to
Sukowa’s risk taking as an actress. She is never still and is always
moving, ever on the edge of explosion. Fierce is the word that comes
to mind about her performance.
    Von Trotta always brings such characters into her films. The
journalist who pushes Katharina Blum, for example, is a volcanic,
egotistical media star who eats his subjects for breakfast. In
“Rosenstrasse,” it is the adult Ruth who is about to erupt and
destroy, so deep is her despair regarding the loss of her husband, the
final loss in a life of too many losses.
    Finally, the performances have to explore all the dimensions of a
relationship—friendship, love, jealousy, anger, envy, and sexuality,
so we can experience the danger and warmth in each relationship.
This is very clear in the performances of Jutta Lampe and Barbara
Sukowa as Juliane and Marianne, the two German sisters. One
expects the relationship of siblings to be either supportive or
rivalrous. The Von Trotta version is neither. I would call the two
sisters symbiotic. They are together, they need each other, they
support each other, and yet there is intense anger between them as
well. And there is intense love. I described the sweater exchange
earlier in this chapter. It is a moment of intimacy, partially sexual.
The goal of these performances was to evoke all the dimensions of


  Margarethe Von Trotta: Historical Life and Personal Life Intersect
