in “Sisters” and at the same time blames the character for being overly
       controlling with her younger sister and with the surrogate younger sis-
       ter after the former’s suicide. For both Von Trotta and Lubitsch, the
       more negative views translate differently than they do in Moodysson.
       Von Trotta veers toward a cerebral, serious approach in “Rosa
       Luxemburg.” The consequence is a neutralization of the film’s
       impact in spite of Barbara Sukowa’s earnest portrayal of Rosa. In the
       case of Lubitsch, he becomes serious and pedantic in “The Man
       I Killed,” blunting the impact of the film. Moodysson, on the other
       hand, just keeps going in “A Hole in My Heart,” looking for empathy
       while bathing us in the contempt his characters feel for themselves,
276    each other, and their world. More on this later in the chapter.
           Before we turn to Moodysson’s work we need to contextualize
       him as a filmmaker of the 21st century, as a European filmmaker, and
       as a Swedish filmmaker. As a Swedish director he works in the
       shadow of Ingmar Bergman, the director who dominated Swedish
       film for 30 years and who even today casts a giant shadow on Swedish
       theater. What is important about Bergman’s films is his range and his
       willingness to take filmic risks. He could be literary (“The Seventh
       Seal”), experimental (“Persona”), classical (“Fanny and Alexander”),
       or genre oriented (“Hour of the Wolf”). Above all, he was visceral in
       his approach to his characters. Portraying honesty, revelation, manip-
       ulation, and creativity was his goal, as it is for Moodysson.
           In Europe, as in the United States, there is an impulse to go with
       young directors and young themes, young ideas; consequently, the
       Dogme movement that developed around Lars Von Trier in
       Denmark in the mid-1990s was important. Dogme was a reaction
       against the high-tech, special-effects, big-budget direction of film-
       making, and it has resonated for directors around the world. Genre
       filmmaking has been a focus for Belgian filmmakers such as Luc
       Belvaux (“The Trilogy”) and for Italian directors such as
       Emmanuele Crialese (“Respiro”). And throughout Europe there is
       an impulse to innovate in response to the dominance of the
       Hollywood film. The upshot has been the rise of filmmakers such
       as Pedro Almodovar in Spain, Mathieu Kassovitz and Jacques
       Audiard in France, and Lynn Ramsay and Danny Boyle in the
       United Kingdom, all of whom have influenced Moodysson.
           Finally, the globalization sensibility has promoted voice, a
       national voice that has used voice-oriented genres to become a


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
