regarded as the auteurs or creative kingpins of their films. This con-
      cept was seized by cinephiles in England, where Karel Reisz and
      Lindsay Anderson wrote about film in the same spirit and began to
      make their own films in the freer, more personal style of the French
      “New Wave” filmmakers.
         In America, the notion of auteurism was quickly adopted by
      John Cassavetes, Arthur Penn, Mike Nichols, and Sidney Lumet.
      Also, an intellectual–journalistic rationale was provided by Andrew
      Sarris; in his film reviews and later in his book The American
      Cinema, Sarris articulated and applied the auteur theory to all of
      American cinema. The auteur revolution had come to the United
6     States, and film schools became a hotbed of auteurism. Graduates
      of the late 1960s (particularly Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford
      Coppola, and George Lucas) fueled in their early films the idea that
      the revolution was going to take over Hollywood.
         In fact it did not, as studios, agents, and actors became more
      important even as the director’s status was rising. Everyone in
      film—actors, editors, writers, musicians—became superstars right
      along with the directors. As the commercial stakes rose, so too did
      the superstar population of Hollywood. Globalization and tech-
      nology have deepened these trends, but today the director is at the
      pinnacle of the film hierarchy.


      Where Are We Today?
      Film today is one of the most important global industries. For many
      Hollywood films, most of the revenue can come from outside of the
      United States. A tentpole film such as “Troy” can expect to earn two
      thirds of its revenue offshore. In the United States, film and televi-
      sion are key export industries. In so fluid and lucrative a milieu, it is
      no wonder that directors are superstars the world over.
          Wong Kar-wai of Hong Kong, Tom Tykwer of Germany, Luc
      Besson of France, and Steven Soderbergh of the United States are
      all at the peak of industry and public attention. In one sense, they
      are part of a continuum begun with Charlie Chaplin and Alfred
      Hitchcock 70 years earlier, but today is different. In addition to the
      industry being more global, there are other reasons for the increased
      importance of directors.


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
