interpretation. As I mentioned earlier, Elia Kazan’s strength lies in
      his direction of the performances of his actors. I would add that he
      is also a powerful interpreter of text. His film “America America”
      (1962) offers a good example. The director’s idea in “America
      America,” an epic journey of a young man from Turkey to
      America, is that in life everyone is either master or slave; conse-
      quently, in every scene—whether involving a father and son, hus-
      band and wife, employer and employee, or simply fellow
      travelers—the director’s idea determines the shape and outcome
      and the level of the performance within the scene. The visualiza-
      tion in “America America” is strong but secondary to the director’s
46    text interpretation.
          Visualization on the other hand, goes to the core of Ridley
      Scott’s work. His director’s idea in “Gladiator” is “What is a man?”
      Scott is interested in all aspects of manhood—son, father, friend,
      lover, leader. His visualization of the main character, Maximus, is
      Scott’s idealization of what it is to be a man—assertive, aggressive,
      yet tender and moral. The antagonist, Commodus, on the other
      hand, is less than a man. He becomes Caesar by killing his father.
      He is cowardly, a man in need of constant attention and jealous of
      rivals, a man who needs his sister’s comfort to have a night’s sleep.
      Scott’s visualization of manhood is always powerful. Maximus is
      foregrounded and photographed in movement. Low angles suggest
      his heroism. Commodus, on the other hand, appears mid-frame or
      toward the back. Mid shots instead of close-ups make him appear
      less of a man. Ridley Scott relied on visualization to articulate his
      director’s idea.
          The Coen brothers had a very different director’s idea in
      “O Brother, Where Art Thou?” Their idea is that the American
      odyssey is less noble than the original. It is all about self-interest
      and religion, sin and repentance. This fable-like idea requires
      exaggerated performances, exaggerated text readings, and a
      visual style that connotes the opposite of realism—let’s call it the
      fabulous.
          What I am suggesting is that to be a good director, the director
      must have a director’s idea that he executes using the tools of direct-
      ing—text interpretation, performance, visualization in balance with
      the director’s interests and skills. Now, let’s turn to a case study of
      good directing.


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
