What differentiates the great director from the good director is the
business of this chapter. To recap, the good director adds value to a
project. Using the narrative tools of character, plot, and story form,
the good director uses a counterpoint approach to give a layered
reading to the text. We are surprised and delighted by surprises that
deepen the story. Guided by his director’s idea, the director orches-
trates the visuals, performances, and text readings to create a subtext
that again deepens the experience of the film for the audience.
    The great director transforms the experience of the film when he
utilizes his director’s idea to add a powerful voice to the film. When
the computer Hal becomes all too human and the human astro-
nauts all too cold and mechanical in “2001: A Space Odyssey”               55
(1968), Stanley Kubrick has told us something profound about our
attachment to technology and human progress. Again and again in
that film we are struck by this level of commentary on human
progress through history. Kubrick uses irony to enhance his voice
and in so doing challenges many of our beliefs about progress.
    Thirty years earlier, Charlie Chaplin had made similar observa-
tions about human progress and human nature in “Modern Times”
(1936). His focus, however, was more specific—the factory. Chaplin’s
ironic observations on the mechanization of production and how
dehumanizing these progressive processes are veer into tragedy (and
reveal his creative genius) when the main character is accidentally
absorbed into the innards of a machine. Visually and spiritually, he
is being consumed alive by the machine.
    Both “2001: A Space Odyssey” and “Modern Times” are exam-
ples of great films made by great directors. Each transforms a narra-
tive into a way of perceiving the world and the behavior of the
people in it differently. This transformation is the mark of the great
director. I should add that great films have been made by directors
who have exceeded their previous work. In other words, great films
have been made by good directors. “The Best Years of Our Lives”
(William Wyler), “High Noon” (Fred Zinnemann), “Singing in the
Rain” (Gene Kelly and Stanley Donen), and “West Side Story”
(Robert Wise) are examples of this phenomenon. In this chapter,
we will focus on great directors rather than great films, as our job is
to understand how, through their work, directors become great.
    Forty years ago, Andrew Sarris in his classic book, American
Cinema, created a hierarchy of American directors and he referred


                                                      The Great Director
