transformed Terry as much as his other significant relationship with
       Edie (Eva Marie Saint). The character arc of secondary characters
       has to be in the service of the main character.
          Actors have to understand the emotional spine that is the char-
       acter arc in order to build their performance. Directors need to
       understand the character arc because for them the character arc is
       the road map for a performance.


       An Aside about Actors as Directors
110    Understanding the character arc is one of the reasons why actors
       have made good directors. Although undervalued, there is a tradi-
       tion of actors becoming directors. The tradition goes all the way
       back to Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton, who in a sense became
       great directors who were as well known as directors as they were
       actors. Although Jerry Lewis and Woody Allen are the most obvious
       directors whose character persona on screen was reflected by their
       work as directors, many actors have chosen different genres in
       which to develop their directorial skills. Charles Laughton, for
       example, chose to direct a nightmarish fable, “The Night of the
       Hunter.” Marlon Brando chose to direct a Western, “One-Eyed
       Jacks.” Both films are powerful, evocative experiences.
           More often, however, actors tend to work closer to familiar terri-
       tory. Dick Powell opted for terse thrillers and war films, such as
       “The Enemy Below.” Lawrence Olivier favored Shakespeare and
       directed “Henry V” and “Hamlet.” Powell and Olivier proved auda-
       cious within their familiar territory. Veering away from familiar ter-
       ritory can result in underappreciation and underfunding. Both Ida
       Lupino (“The Burglar”) and John Cassavetes (“Shadows”) devel-
       oped underground reputations as directors, but their projects
       proved difficult to finance and neither actor could sustain a career
       as a director.
           This situation has changed considerably in the past 25 years. The
       biggest stars have become important directors. Warren Beatty made
       “Heaven Can’t Wait” and “Reds.” Robert Redford made “Ordinary
       People.” Clint Eastwood directed “Unforgiven” and “Mystic River.”
       Mel Gibson directed “Braveheart” and “The Passion of the Christ.”
       Actors Robert De Niro, Ben Stiller, Diane Keaton, Jack Nicholson,


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
