In this world of celebrities and non-celebrities, extreme behavior
is the norm, as reflected in “American Psycho.” If anything, the
behavior becomes more extreme throughout the film. In “American
Psycho,” the celebrity/non-celebrity line is constantly being rede-
fined. On first appearance, Patrick Bateman might be considered a
celebrity. He has the job, the money, the clothes, and the attitude
that suggest it. But something as simple as his colleagues’ having
more elegant business cards is enough to push him into the category
of non-celebrity. In “American Psycho,” there is no sympathetic
group; rather, the characters could be divided into groups of unpleas-
ant and more unpleasant. Only the prostitutes Patrick uses summon
a modicum of sympathy. Although Patrick himself acts as narrator, it      305
is his secretary, Jean, who gives the film an emotional baseline. In
her vulnerability and in her sense of having a moral compass, she is
different from all the other characters in the narrative. She rather
than Patrick is the character we are invited to stand with. In terms of
linking celebrity and banality, all the characters that surround
Patrick, both men and women (fiancée, mistress), are banal and well
positioned enough to be considered celebrities, but their status is
conditional. Each is aware of the vulnerability of that status, aware
that it could be withdrawn at any moment for any reason.
    Celebrity and banality are at the very heart of the characters in
both “I Shot Andy Warhol” and “American Psycho.” And, in both,
the place (New York) becomes an active character that breeds the
desire to be or to be seen as a celebrity. Not to be a celebrity in New
York is not to be seen at all. In this sense, New York acts as a
metaphor, the geographical pinnacle that represents celebrity.
    Finally, the voice-oriented genre Harron chooses must be
combined with her approach to character and narrative incident. That
approach fluctuates between sincerity and irony, inside the character
and outside the character. The consequence is the creation of a satiric
frame where Harron is free to shift between standing with the charac-
ter and gazing at the character. The genre frame enables Harron to be
gently and not so gently satiric about the world of celebrity around
New York and Andy Warhol in “I Shot Andy Warhol” and about the
shallow narcissistic world around the affluent Patrick Bateman in
1980s New York in “American Psycho.” For our discussion of these two
films, I suggest that we use the openings and closings of each film as
the basis of our exploration of the director’s idea.


                                    Mary Harron: Celebrity and Banality
