The competent director presents a straightforward narrative, clearly
and cleanly focusing on a style of performance, text reading, and
camera execution that delivers the narrative without subtext. The
intent of the director is in this case explicit, and he may be very suc-
cessful as a result. The good director is more ambitious and employs
strategies to add value to the project. Our task in this chapter is to
explore and exemplify how that value is added. The three major
areas of activity for the director are text reading, performance, and
visual interpretation. And, of course, the impetus for making useful,
effective choices is the director’s idea. What exactly is the director’s
idea and how does it work?
                                                                            41

How the Director’s Idea Works

Two versions of “The Manchurian Candidate” offer us the oppor-
tunity to look at two directors applying two different director’s ideas
to essentially the same story. Both versions are based on George
Axelrod’s screenplay of the Richard Condon novel, and both focus
on the plot of creating an assassin via brainwashing—an assassin
who is trained to kill a presidential candidate at a political conven-
tion. The killing would allow the antagonists and their backers (the
Communists in the 1962 version, a transnational corporation in the
2004 version) to control the presidency and consequently to exploit
the most powerful country in the world for its own purposes. In this
sense, both versions are “paranoid” political thrillers.
    The 1962 version, directed by John Frankenheimer, focuses on
Raymond Shaw, who is the assassin brainwashed in Manchuria. His
mother, a conservative political powerhouse, is the American agent
who controls him on behalf of the Communists. Her husband is a
U.S. senator who, as the vice presidential candidate, would become
the presidential candidate when the assassination takes place.
Bennett Marco, Raymond’s commanding officer in Korea, is a man
with bad dreams. He keeps dreaming that Raymond killed members
of their patrol in Korea rather than saving the platoon, as Raymond’s
Medal of Honor commendation reads. These dreams drive Marco
to discover the truth about Raymond Shaw and to try to stop him.
    In this version of “The Manchurian Candidate,” Raymond is the
main character, and the Cold War context gives this 1962 film a


                                                        The Good Director
