and in the end his music saves him. In each case, these specific
notes help the actors deepen their performances and strengthen the
sense of their inner lives.


Directing the Camera

Polanski’s director’s idea, the aloneness of existence, goes to the
heart of his camera placement and shot selection. Camera place-
ment tells us whether or not we, the audience, should identify with
the character. Subjective placement encourages identification.
Proximity to the action suggests even more about the audience’s           229
relationship with a character. In Polanski’s choice of a camera place-
ment that is not only subjective but in effect placed so close to the
action that it actually crowds the character, he is pushing us into
identification as well as into developing a feeling about that char-
acter. The crowding creates an almost claustrophobic intensity
around the characters. This placement has been an important
dimension of Polanski’s work since “Knife in the Water” and
“Repulsion.” In the films we have discussed here, Polanski used this
placement to enhance our identification with Rosemary, Jake
Gittes, Tess, and Szpilman. He also used the sense of proximity, or
crowding, to create a sense of the aloneness of the character.
    Aloneness requires context, and Polanski used the moving cam-
era as well as the wide angle to contextualize how alone a character
is. An example of the moving camera shot is the return of Szpilman
to the streets of the ghetto, after he has lost his parents. The camera
captures Szpilman crying, all around him the emptiness of the
streets of the ghetto. All that is left is the artifacts of the removed
Jews or the dead bodies of those left behind. Szpilman occupies
only part of the frame and is seen as truly abandoned and alone.
    An example of Polanski’s use of the full frame of a shot for the
same purpose is from “Tess.” On her wedding night, in the fore-
ground of the shot Tess is confessing her sinful past to new husband
Angel. Polanksi held the shot for a long time. In the background,
standing against the fireplace, is an out-of-focus Angel. He listens
passively to her story. The gap between them is huge, and it
telegraphs the outcome of the confession; the marriage is over
before it has started. Tess is alone.


                            Roman Polanski: The Aloneness of Existence
