(“Bastard Out of Carolina”). Other female directors deal with a
       broader band of narrative material in their films, including Ida
       Lupino (“The Burglar”), Diane Keaton (“Unstrung Heroes”), and
       Kathryn Bigelow (“Point Break”).
           In France, Chantal Ackerman (“Nuit et Jour”) Claire Denis
       (“Beau Travail”), Josiane Balasko (“French Twist”), Agnés Jaoui
       (“The Taste of Others”), and Coline Serreau (“Chaos”) have made
       important films from the point of view of women. Generally, these
       films have taken a political position but they essentially use voice-
       oriented genres such as the melodrama, fable, experimental narrative,
       and docudrama to humorously point out the shortcomings of men in
290    the war between men and women. More often, French films have
       neatly divided French womanhood among coquettes (Brigitte
       Bardot), hookers with a heart (Simone Signoret), independent
       women (Jeanne Moreau), and suffering mothers (Catherine Frot).
       This was the context for Catherine Breillat as she moved from a
       career as a novelist to a career as a novelist and film director.
           Although some of the filmmakers mentioned here share Breillat’s
       passion for the equal treatment of women in society and outrage
       about the inequities bred in their respective societies, none has opted
       exclusively for the sex act as a narrative focal point. But Breillat can-
       not be put into the Russ Meyers and Tinto Brass category of film-
       makers who make sexuality the narrative focus of their work. Breillat
       is far more interesting and, might I add, daring in her approach.
           To move more deeply into Breillat’s work, a number of observa-
       tions are necessary. First, Breillat is as interested in the inner life of
       her characters as she is in their sexuality. She is very interested in
       exploring how a younger sister who is fat feels about having a beau-
       tiful but impulsive older sister in “Fat Girl.” How does she feel being
       the scapegoat for the three other members of her family? How does
       a woman director, Jeanne, work, and why does she have such mixed
       feelings toward her male actor in “Sex Is Comedy”? How does sex-
       ual frustration push a schoolteacher to experiment with a variety of
       pleasure-seeking encounters in “Romance”?
           Breillat seems interested in a woman’s sense of dignity and is
       willing to set up undignified or humiliating situations in order to
       explore the dignity/humiliation paradox in human sexuality. This is
       the core issue in “Anatomy of Hell,” in which a woman has an
       encounter with a homosexual and hires him for four nights of sexual


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
