extremes. At one extreme is directing so bad that it takes on a campy
          virtue. The films of Ed Wood are a good example of this extreme.
          At the other extreme are good filmmakers who clearly have added
          value to their projects but who occasionally lapse. John
          Frankenheimer, who made the great “Manchurian Candidate”
          (1962), also made “The Year of the Gun” (1985). William Friedkin,
          who made “The Exorcist” (1973) and “The French Connection”
          (1970), also made “The Hunted” (2003). Lapses such as these can be
          due to personal or professional problems. My point here is that even
          good directors fall down from time to time.
              In between these two extremes lie some of the most commer-
28        cial directors of all time. To make my point I will concentrate on
          three: Brett Ratner (“Red Dragon”), Chris Columbus (“Mrs.
          Doubtfire”), and Richard Donner (“Conspiracy Theory”). The
          example of “Red Dragon” will suffice for the moment. Based on
          Thomas Harris’ Hannibal novel, the film is the second film ver-
          sion of the novel. This version by Brett Ratner focuses on the plot
          to find a serial killer. The Lechter character is a presence in the
          film but is not as central as he is in Silence of the Lambs, the fol-
          low-up Harris novel; nevertheless, the Lechter character dwarfs
          the protagonist, the FBI psychologist (Ed Norton), as well as the
          antagonist (Ralph Fiennes).
              Turning to the earlier film version, Michael Mann’s
          “Manhunter” (1986) used emotional instability and its inherent
          violent unpredictability as the director’s idea. The protagonist, the
          antagonist, the reporter, and of course Hannibal Lechter all share
          an unsettled, unsettling instability or fear of it; consequently, their
          actions and their reactions come as a surprise to the character as
          well as to the audience, which becomes immersed in that insta-
          bility. All the while Mann presents a very structured visualization
          that is clean and antiseptic. When violence does erupt (the mur-
          der scenes, the killing of the reporter), they are all the more shock-
          ing as they break up the ordered world Mann has visually
          presented. The result is the powerful, disturbing experience of
          “Manhunter” created by the use of the director’s idea to add value
          to the narrative. It is this result that differentiates the competent
          director from the good director. The two case studies that follow
          provide creative profiles of two competent directors, Antoine
          Fuqua and Simon Wincer.


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
