these are men who outwardly maintain a veneer of sociability but
       inwardly burn to the point of torment. For Terry Malloy, his inner
       conscience keeps telling him that his life could be better than it is.
       Cal Trask’s demon is his family’s past. If he can own up to the
       fact that he was deserted by his mother and convince his brother
       and father to do the same, then his life within the family and how
       they see him will change. For Stavros Topouzoglou, his inner
       demon was his dream of going to America, where he believes that
       at last he will be free. Their inner demons certainly drive each of
       these characters, but without opposition they would be no more
       than conflicted or ambivalent characters. The antagonists—indeed,
192    all who oppose them—elevate their struggles to something far
       greater.
           In “On the Waterfront,” Johnny Friendly (Lee J. Cobb) is the
       ostensible antagonist. He is joined by numerous associates, the most
       important being Terry’s brother, Charlie the Gent (Rod Steiger).
       While Charlie puts gentle pressure on Terry, from the outset we see
       Johnny physically beating an associate. Johnny spars with Terry,
       implicitly telling Terry that he can and will fight anyone who gets in
       his way. Johnny is as physical in expression as is Terry. His explo-
       siveness is the source of his power, and his associates are willing to
       kill for him. This is Terry’s opposition.
           In “East of Eden,” Cal Trask’s antagonist is his father, Adam
       (Raymond Massey). Although early on Cal’s hatred was aimed at his
       mother, the character whose approval he seeks now is his father.
       Adam, religious and judgmental, is as rejecting of Cal as he is
       accepting of Cal’s brother, Aron (Richard Davalos). Adam attacks
       Cal’s pragmatic business suggestions as being immoral. Even though
       he was simply trying to help his father, Cal feels as though his father
       is accusing him of being immoral.
           In “America, America,” Stavros Topouzoglou wants to go to
       America. Everyone—family and strangers—seems to be standing in
       his way and want him to do their bidding. In the first act, his father
       and the Turks want Stavros to remain as they perceive him—filial
       son and loyal subject. In the second act, a fellow traveler steals from
       Stavros everything of value he is carrying to Constantinople. In
       Constantinople, his cousin sees Stavros as a meal ticket out of an
       impoverished business, and Mr. Sinnikoglou (Paul Mann) sees
       Stavros as a dutiful husband for his daughter, Thomna. In the third


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
