the child has been immolated, a cruel prank, because he is his
       mother’s son. Between the narrative bookends provided by the son,
       we focus on the story of the two sisters. A historical thread traces
       their history from young children to adolescents. The family history
       focuses on the father, the compliance of Marianne, and the
       rebelliousness of Juliane. The contemporary story is a total reversal,
       with Marianne now a bank robber/terrorist and Juliane a committed
       leftist journalist. Juliane has a ten-year relationship with an architect
       but no marriage and no children. Marianne enters and exits
       Juliane’s life with some frequency and chides her sister for not being
       more like her—action over words. A third of the way through the
266    film Marianne is taken by the police, and further scenes between
       the sisters take place in prison. The second third of the film focuses
       on this period. The visits alternate between being angry and affec-
       tionate. On one of the last visits Juliane brings their mother.
           When Juliane and Wolfgang are away on holiday in Italy, Juliane
       sees news of her sister on television. She calls home to discover that
       her sister has hanged herself. The last section of the film focuses
       on Juliane’s obsession with proving that her sister was killed rather
       than committing suicide. Her obsession fractures her own personal
       relationship with Wolfgang. In her commitment to raise Marianne’s
       son, Juliane is becoming closer to her dead sister. The scenes that
       we focus on are the childhood/adolescent scenes of the two sisters.
       As children they seem inseparable. Their father is a pastor, and
       prayer and compliance are demanded in his home, but Juliane is
       rebellious. The father insists that her dress code of black jeans must
       be set aside if she is to attend a dance. She is rebellious and asserts
       her right to dress as she pleases. The father rejects her and her
       rights. Only Marianne’s intervention leads to Juliane attending
       the dance. Even at the dance, though, Juliane is nonconformist. On
       a wager, she dances a waltz alone, and all of the students gape at
       her. In a later scene, the adolescent Marianne and Juliane watch
       concentration camp footage with their classmates. Marianne leaves,
       ill. Juliane joins her, in solidarity with her sister. These scenes
       together portray the personal relationship of the sisters and how they
       stood together against the past. The father represents that past, and
       he and what he represents is actively rejected by Juliane. On the
       other hand, Marianne insists that you must work with the past—
       father and religion and the Nazi ideology about family—in order to


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
