the young girl and the neighboring black madam do. This sexuality
       complicates the search issue and the mother–son issue. Anger is the
       only thing Cal shares with the mother. She is angry at an overly
       inquisitive bank teller, and she is angry at Cal.
           The most complex scene is the “On the Waterfront” scene.
       Ostensibly, it is a scene about corrupt hiring practices, but it is full
       of conflict. Terry gets the job all the other longshoremen want.
       Doyle needs work to pay for a funeral for his murdered son and is
       forced to accept money from the union loan shark. The crime com-
       mission investigators want Terry to work with them, but he refuses.
       The gangsters are there to keep order, Edie is there to get her father
198    a ticket to work, and the priest is there to take a stance against the
       gangsters on behalf of the longshoremen in his parish. The scene is
       brimming with opposing views, in fact crowded with them.
           Somewhere in the middle of these two extremes is the scene
       from “America, America” about how Stavros could improve his
       bleak situation by marrying into a wealthy family; however, Stavros
       is really trying to secure the money he needs for passage to America.
       His cousin hopes that if Stavros does well it might save his own
       impoverished carpet business. Thomna is torn between the past (life
       with her father) and a new life with another man (Stavros), and the
       prospective father-in-law wants grandsons to preserve his name.
       Everyone in the scene wants something different; consequently, the
       scene is rife with drama.


       Directing the Actor

       Directing the actor is the key to the success of Elia Kazan’s director’s
       idea. As a former actor and a devotee of the Group Theatre, Kazan
       developed a powerful understanding of the director’s vision and
       actors as the instruments of that vision. As a result, Kazan always
       imagined casting the best (e.g., Brando), but when that was not pos-
       sible he worked with the next best choice. In “The Arrangement”
       (1969), that proved to be Kirk Douglas. In “America, America,” he
       settled for the unknown Stathis Giallelis. Kazan tells it this way:

          “I believe that if I’d found a De Niro, a Hoffman, or a Pacino,
          the film might have been more and certainly more successful


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
