Harron finds the common ground to be the banality of both celebri-
           ties and the wannabes.
               Whether this perception makes Harron a satirist of celebrity or
           whether she is simply an interested observer, she does seem to be
           able to take us into her character’s inner need for celebrity and into
           the pathology generated by the clash of inner need and outer real-
           ity. For her the gold of celebrity glitters preciously but at the same
           time it is false, fool’s gold. This is the tragedy of her characters.
           Their efforts lead only to despair and to destruction. The fact that
           she can achieve feeling for these unattractive characters is part of
           Harron’s gift as a writer and director.
302            In order to understand Harron’s director’s idea, it is important to
           examine her work within the context of a woman directing in
           America at the end of the 20th century and into the next. Earlier
           chapters examined the work of Margarethe Von Trotta and
           Catherine Breillat, both of whom are political filmmakers in that
           their subject is women in a world of men. Von Trotta focuses on the
           lives of her characters, while Breillat focuses on the inner life as
           expressed in sexual behavior. Harron is far more American
           (although she is Canadian) in her sociological focus. It is not the
           war between men and women that interests her, nor is it class. It is
           a different divide between the have-nots and the haves. The haves
           are celebrities, the Andy Warhols, while the have-nots are the
           Valerie Solanas characters of the society.
               Among the other women directors working in America today,
           Alison Anders focuses on women trying to make their way in a
           man’s world in “Gas, Food and Lodging.” Amy Heckerling exam-
           ines fashionista life for females in the fast lane of high school in
           “Clueless.” Mo Ogrodnik is interested in adolescent sexuality in
           “Fresh.” Patty Jenkins is interested in female pathology and its
           genesis in male/female relationships in “Monster.” Mira Nair is
           interested in celebrating her Indian roots in “Monsoon Wedding.”
           The Sprecher sisters are interested in exploring post-9/11 ennui in
           “Thirteen Conversations About One Thing.” The perspective in all
           of these films is modern and feminist. How Mary Harron differs
           from these filmmakers is principally in her choice of genres. “I Shot
           Andy Warhol” is a docudrama. “American Psycho” is a moral fable
           or hyperdrama. (For a discussion of hyperdrama, or the moral fable,
           see the book I co-wrote with Pat Cooper, Writing the Short Film,


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
