the existential dimension in her interpretation of the text. She
       could have chosen any of the other dimensions—psychological,
       sociological, or political. A different reading, however, would have
       changed the film considerably.
           A second prism available to the director when developing a direc-
       tor’s idea is a possible relationship between the narrative and issues
       of the day. Every time period has recognizable issues of the day.
       Looking at 2005, for example, large issues of the day would include
       the role of religion in life, globalization, challenges to the environ-
       ment, the right to privacy, equality for all (e.g., women’s rights in a
       man’s world), and, of course, modernism versus tradition. There are
334    many other specific, local issues, but these larger issues are begging
       for attention on an urgent personal, national, and international level.
           If the director is passionate about society, the issues of the day
       become relevant as a prism for interpreting the script. These issues
       also give the director a platform for expressing his or her personal
       beliefs as well as a vehicle for gaining an audience. Issues of the day
       can focus the director’s idea in a particular way. Steven Soderbergh
       has often used an issue of the day to make his narratives more com-
       pelling. “Erin Brockovich” used the prism of women’s rights in a
       man’s world to make the main character’s journey more compelling
       to the audience. Power and its partner, corruption, drive the drug
       story “Traffic.” Parenting is at the heart of Soderbergh’s revenge
       story, “The Limey.” Considering issues of the day during the text
       interpretation can help in developing a director’s idea.
           Voice, which expresses the director’s opinions, is another device
       that can move a director from text interpretation to a director’s idea.
       Voice can in good measure be a reflection of the character of the direc-
       tor. Stanley Kubrick was ambitious, ironic, and passionate in his views
       of human progress. He differed with technological or scientific views
       that the human race has progressed. The Coen brothers share
       Kubrick’s skepticism but are far more playful in articulating their voice
       on the issue. Steven Spielberg also has views on the issue, but being
       more optimistic in his voice, his narratives seem positively hopeful in
       comparison to those of Kubrick. “Artificial Intelligence: AI,” a Kubrick
       project directed by Spielberg after Kubrick’s death, offers a good exam-
       ple of the clash of two distinct voices. The script developed by Kubrick
       reflects the critical voice of Kubrick, but the visual style and perform-
       ances reflect the more optimistic voice of Spielberg.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
