vision of Russia. We will defer observations about these visuals until
we discuss how the leader is presented visually.
    We turn next to the ordinary citizens. In each of these films, they
are important because Eisenstein was making films within a society
that viewed classlessness as a central goal. Relative to the shot selec-
tion for most other characters, Eisenstein chose to portray ordinary
people in close-up or mid shots, which allowed him to present the
characters in a more emotional manner. In “Potemkin,” individual
sailors, the mourning townspeople at Vakulinchuk’s funeral, and the
victims of the Odessa Steppes massacre are all presented in this
way. The shot selection allowed Eisenstein to individuate these char-
acters. It was important that they never be simply the classless crowd.       129
For Eisenstein and his narrative, they were the emotional heart of the
land. This pattern of presentations is continued in “Alexander
Nevsky.” Whether fishermen or urban peasants, soldiers for Nevsky
or victims of the Teutonic knights, these characters were kind
hearted, simple, and morally good—in a word, admirable patriots
and martyrs for their country. Again, Eisenstein’s use of close-up and
mid shots establishes an emotional connection with these characters.
    For his antagonists, Eisenstein resorted to a different strategy.
Art direction and the use of lightness or darkness defined these
characters. Eisenstein also chose to have these characters move less and
used mid and long shots rather than close-ups to distance the audience
from these characters. When he did use a close-up, as with the Boyars
in “Ivan the Terrible,” shadows mottled the faces. When he was empha-
sizing the cruelty of a film’s antagonists, Eisenstein would focus on their
victims—children thrown alive into a fire and peasant leaders hung for
not bending to the Teutonic will in “Alexander Nevsky.” When
Eisenstein focused on the antagonists, he tried to convey an image of
their power and ruthlessness. For the helmeted foot soldiers of the
Teutonic Order, the camera was positioned very close to the soldiers,
looking up at their lances. The image crowds the viewer and impresses
with its sense of invincibility. Eisenstein also emphasized the vain and
threatening nature of the helmets in “Alexander Nevsky”—the horns
and the talons appeared threatening to the enemy, and the viewers.
    Finally, we should discuss Eisenstein’s images of a leader,
particularly in “Alexander Nevsky” and Parts I and II of “Ivan
the Terrible.” Eisenstein excelled at supporting the mythology
around leadership in all three films. I have already mentioned the


                               Sergei Eisenstein: The Historical Dialectic
