“The Shop Around the Corner” (1940)
       “The Shop Around the Corner” begins with the introduction of the
       main character, Alfred Kralik, at his workplace, Matuschek and
       Company, in Budapest. Kralik is a conscientious employee and pop-
       ular with his boss, Mr. Matuschek, who invited him to dinner at his
       home the night before. He is the envy of his fellow workers.
       Matuschek arrives at the store, and it is clear that he is admiring and
       perhaps envious of Kralik. And here our excerpt begins. Matuschek
       asks for Kralik’s opinion of a cigarette box he is thinking of stocking in
       the store. The box plays music in addition to holding cigarettes. Kralik
       is not impressed by the cigarette box and discourages Matuschek from
180    stocking it. Matuschek acts like a scorned lover; clearly, he is imma-
       ture and not at all confident about his own judgment.
           Enter Clara Novak. Clara is looking for a job but does not say so.
       Kralik clearly mistakes her for a customer and is quite charming
       until he learns her real intention. At that point, he becomes politely
       dismissive. Matuschek, still concerned about his cigarette box, mis-
       takes Clara for a customer and seeks her opinion on it. She is
       impressed. Matuschek is encouraged until he learns that Clara is
       job hunting. He walks away but Clara is not so easily dismissed. She
       intends to show Matuschek and Kralik that she can sell anything,
       even this cigarette box. She approaches an overweight customer and
       promotes the box as a candy box that will alert her every time she
       reaches for another piece of candy. She assures the woman that the
       purchase will help her lose weight. Clara sells the box for double
       the price and has a job. Kralik has an employee he did not want, but
       Matuschek is justified in ordering many more of the boxes. The
       scene ends; the romantic couple has met, and they seem to be
       antagonists rather than potential lovers.

       “To Be or Not To Be” (1942)
       The focus of “To Be or Not To Be” is slightly different. The roman-
       tic couple is a narcissistic wife and a would-be young lover. The
       scene opens in the theater where “Hamlet” is being performed.
       Joseph Tura, who is playing Hamlet, is backstage ordering a sand-
       wich from a nearby delicatessen. His wife, Maria Tura, who is play-
       ing Ophelia, exits the stage and solicits opinions about her
       performance. She also offers support to her obviously insecure hus-
       band and assures him that he has never been better. What Joseph is


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
