Important in the creation of scale are two other features of
           Kubrick’s text interpretation. The first is the centrality of ideas in his
           narrative, and the second is his approach to character in his films.
           In “2001: A Space Odyssey,” the narrative is remarkably ambitious,
           but essentially it conveys the idea that, although progress has been
           made, the arrogance produced by that progress has eroded man’s
           capacity to be in the world. The erosion has made man nature’s
           victim rather than its master. In “Full Metal Jacket,” the creation of
           killing machines may seem necessary to further modern imperial-
           ism but the consequent loss in humanity and empathy for others
           more than offsets the gains. In “Eyes Wide Shut,” the modern mate-
240        rial world is a pretty empty, lonely place, instead of being a cornu-
           copia of joy and well-being. All of the characters in “Eyes Wide
           Shut” are well off materially (except perhaps for the women in the
           sex-for-sale business), but the characters come across as depressed
           and spiritually flat.
               In order to go from the specific to the general, a particular
           approach to character is required. When I discussed George Stevens
           and his approach to character in an earlier chapter, I noted the
           importance of the audience identifying with the characters and all
           that Stevens deployed to deepen that identification. The opposite is
           at play with Kubrick. He invites simply watching a character rather
           than empathizing with that character, and he tends to treat the char-
           acter as a stereotype rather than as a three-dimensional person.
           Although we might admire Joker’s antiauthoritarian streak, we never
           know enough about him to care more deeply in “Full Metal
           Jacket.” When Cowboy dies, he is no more than Joker’s friend and
           the platoon’s nervous recent leader. His death is the pointless death
           of yet another soldier, the general case more than the specific.
           Whether the character is unsympathetic, as is the short-tempered
           Redmond Barry in “Barry Lyndon,” or arrogant, as is astronaut
           Bowman in “2001: A Space Odyssey,” the result is the same. We
           watch these characters rather than seeing ourselves in them. In this
           way they too become the general rather than the specific.
               Another technique of Kubrick’s was to position the main charac-
           ter as his own antagonist. This point is clearest in “The Killing” and
           “The Shining,” but it is also the case of Redmond Barry in “Barry
           Lyndon.” His treatment of his wife and her son moves him from
           protagonist to antagonist. In “2001: A Space Odyssey,” Bowman’s


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
