is no context in this dead-on shot it looks as if Benjamin is running
but not getting anywhere. Because he does not have much time to
get to the church before his former girlfriend’s wedding (so he can
prevent it), the sense of running yet standing still exaggerates the
tension we feel for Benjamin and his goal.


Camera Placement

Another choice the director must make is where to put the camera.
The options are broad, but each has a specific impact. The large
questions are:                                                             89

   1. How close should I place the camera to the action?
   2. Do I want a subjective or an objective placement?
   3. How high or low should I place the camera?

Proximity
Placing the camera at a distance from the action of the characters
distances us from those characters and their actions. Doing so puts
the audience in the position of observers. Placing the camera very
close to the action promotes intensity, intimacy, and even a some-
what claustrophobic relationship with the characters and action. In
the films of Steven Spielberg and Alfred Hitchcock, the camera is
placed close to the action so the audience can identify with the
characters. Roman Polanski, in “Tess” and in “Repulsion,” crowds
the characters with the camera. The camera is all but on top of the
characters. Such placement generates intensity, anxiety, and iden-
tification. Placing the camera somewhere between at a distance
from the action and up close to it puts the camera in a neutral posi-
tion where it can be used to record action but does not particularly
create intensity. There is no question about who the story is focused
on. The more neutral position is where most directors place the
camera.

Objectivity
An objective camera position places the audience in a position to
watch the action. There is no clear choice of sides being made, no
single point of view presented. The objective camera placement


                                                              The Camera
