did the taxi scene, almost in a single shot. Blackie climbs into bed
           with Poldi. His hands are all over Poldi. He is verbally intimidating,
           but the scene is a seduction. Blackie takes Poldi’s face in his hands,
           his lips pressed up close to Poldi’s lips. The crux of the scene is this
           narrative paradox. Blackie is looking for a confession to a secret but
           he is getting something else—the plague. The tension in the scene
           visually and narrative-wise is excruciating.
              To examine more closely the realization of Kazan’s director’s
           idea in his work, we will look at the opening of “Panic in the Streets”
           (Blackie’s crime) and the final scene when Blackie is captured; the
           hiring scene in “On the Waterfront,” when Cal follows his mother;
194        the opening scene of “East of Eden”; and the negotiation–betrayal
           scene in “America, America.”

           “Panic in the Streets” (1950)
           The murder scene from “Panic in the Streets,” set near the port of
           New Orleans at night, introduces the victim as a sick man who has
           left a card game when he was winning. Blackie, a petty hoodlum,
           and his two associates, Raymond and Poldi, follow the victim
           outside. Blackie wants the sick man’s money. The victim pulls a
           knife but is killed by Blackie. He takes the money and orders his
           associates to get rid of the body. This scene proceeds in an expres-
           sionistic fashion with highly dramatic lighting.
               The second scene, the capture of Blackie, proceeds in a
           documentary fashion. The police arrive as Blackie and Raymond
           transport Poldi to their disreputable doctor’s private clinic. They
           carry him on a mattress down a flight of stairs. As the public health
           official, Dr. Reed (Richard Widmark), calls for Blackie to turn over
           the sick man, Blackie dumps Poldi over the side of the walkdown
           (the external stairs leading to the street). Poldi falls to his death as
           Blackie and Raymond run for their lives. With the police in pursuit,
           Blackie and Raymond flee to the port area. They enter a large
           warehouse housing coffee. The security guard recognizes Blackie
           and they exchange greetings. It is clear that Blackie used to work
           here as a stevedore. The guard asks if Blackie is coming back for
           a job. Blackie states he wants to ship out and asks if any ships are
           leaving port. As the police and Dr. Reed arrive, Blackie kills the
           security guard. He and Raymond escape through a hatch in the
           warehouse floor with Dr. Reed in pursuit. They climb down and


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
