never gotten along with, stays east. Charles has achieved material
success, but in terms of personal happiness he remains unfulfilled.
Adam takes his wife with him to California, but she deserts him and
their twin infant sons. He raises them on a farm and becomes more
interested in religious than material values. His sons, Cal and Aron,
are opposites. Cal is pragmatic, and Aron, the father’s favorite, is ide-
alistic, trying to echo his father’s values. Cal discovers that his
mother is not dead but lives in Salinas, just over the mountain
ridge. She is the leading madam in the town. In an attempt to hurt
his brother, Cal introduces their mother to his saintly brother. The
story ends with the disillusioned Aron being killed in Europe dur-
ing World War I and Cal taking care of his father, now felled by a            77
stroke. The goal of this three-generation family narrative was to cap-
ture the post-Civil War eagerness for material recovery as well as the
deep conflict between material and spiritual values in the American
character. The biblical overlay of Cain and Abel echoes through
two generations—Charles and Adam, Cal and Aron. This pitting of
two brothers against one another is the central conflict. The fact
that in each case one brother is materialistic and the other taken
with religious or spiritual values gives that conflict a deeper layer
and allows the novel to explore the national, irreconcilable paradox.
The story takes place near Eden (paradise), but remains outside of
it, thus the title of the novel.
     The film version of this story was written by playwright Paul
Osborne for director Elia Kazan. That version focused on the sec-
ond generation, Cal and Aron, and the events of the last 100 pages
of the book. In this version, Cal is the main character and the
antagonist is his father rather than Aron. The story begins when
Cal finds Kate, his mother, in Salinas. The dramatic arc is Cal’s
struggle to secure his father’s affection. To do so, he earns
money in bean futures to pay for losses his father incurred when
experimenting with various refrigeration processes. Cal also tries
to hurt his brother by taking him to learn the truth about their
mother.
     By focusing on a single generation, Kazan interpreted the story
as a search for the acceptance of one generation by the previous
generation. This interpretation frames the story as a clash of values,
not between brothers but between generations. The message is that
just because Cal is different from others (Aron, Adam) does not


                                                        Text Interpretation
