these scenes to imply what is about to happen, the audience is
       unaware of what might follow. In an extreme long shot, a rider high
       atop a hill waves at the other riders to join him. Two shots later,
       Ethan and the five other riders have found the killed cattle and a
       shot later we learn that a Comanche spear has killed one of the
       bulls. To register the point of the scene (“It’s a murder raid!”), Ford
       finally moves into a mid shot. Stealing the cattle was only a ruse to
       draw out the men. After half the men leave for the Jorgenson ranch,
       Ford moves into reaction mode. Martin, panicked, rides off to his try
       to save his adoptive parents, while Ethan takes off his saddle to feed
       and water his horse. As he brushes his horse down, Ford cuts to a
144    close-up of Ethan but masks his eyes as if to shield us from his pain.
       Because so much of the scene is long shot, the close-up is almost
       overwhelming. We understand and feel for Ethan.
           Let’s move from the still, formal long shot in “The Searchers” to
       a long shot with more movement in “My Darling Clementine.” By
       movement, I mean movement within the frame as well as the move-
       ment of the camera. The scene in “My Darling Clementine” pro-
       ceeds as formally as does the scene in “The Searchers.” It begins
       with the conversation between Wyatt Earp and Clementine. It is
       early morning, and behind them is the bright desert morning. After
       Clementine asks if she can join Wyatt for the morning service, they
       begin to move in the direction of the service. The camera moves in
       advance of the couple. The feeling of the shot, given the dearth of
       moving camera shots to that point, is as surprising as if Wyatt and
       Clementine were marching down the aisle to be married. What
       follows is a long shot with the service site in the background. As they
       move into the shot we are aware of how much sky there is. Below
       the sky are a flag and the foundation for the church to be built. The
       image is formal and rather ritualistic. Wyatt Earp and Clementine
       almost march toward the future church.
           Ford cuts to the citizen–preacher who leads the service, but as so
       often happens in Ford films it is music rather than words that makes
       up the service. As in “Rio Grande,” “She Wore a Yellow Ribbon,”
       and “How Green Was My Valley,” music gives voice to the feeling
       Ford is establishing. In “My Darling Clementine,” that feeling is the
       pleasure of being together, the hope that in the future Tombstone
       will be a community rather than a lawless outpost, a center of
       society rather than of sin, an ideal rather than its current reality.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
