energy in the room are now focused on Angela. The young Eastman
son, a contemporary of George, rushes over to Angela and offers her
date a drink (but nothing for George). Angela leaves quickly, as do
some of the Eastmans, all but abandoning George. When George
leaves, he assures Charles Eastman that he will be happy to accept
the job opportunity offered him. In this scene, the art direction sets
up the objects of George Eastman’s desire—a home like his uncle’s,
a life that includes someone like Angela Vickers. The placement of
the camera suggests the difference between him and his uncle’s
family. The camera does not portray George as a victim, but it
strongly implies that these people are not going to make it easy for
him to fulfill his desires.                                              157
    To the issue of camera placement Stevens added pace in the
Thuggee attack on the village of Tantrapur in “Gunga Din.” The
focus is on creating suspense that culminates in a 12-minute action
sequence. The tone of the sequence is very much in keeping with
that of the film—energetic adventure. In order to create suspense,
the camera initially follows Sergeant Ballantyne as he searches the
seemingly empty village. The camera shifts from long shots that
establish the emptiness against the backdrop of mountains towering
in the background to a subjective moving mid shot of the sergeant,
as if the camera is creeping up on him. Finally it stops in close-up.
Ballantyne turns his head. He sees one of his soldiers standing guard
atop a building. As he turns back to the mountains, the same cut-
away of the guard reveals a Thuggee strangling the guard. Stevens
then cuts to a shot with Sergeant Cutter in the foreground. Deep in
the background, slightly out of focus, we see another guard being
strangled by a Thuggee. The threat is established.
    When Sergeant Ballantyne enters a building dark from its shel-
tered windows he discovers a group of Thuggee pilgrims. He forces
them out of the room and a fight ensues. Sergeants McChesney and
Cutter come to his rescue, and they handily regain the upper hand.
At this point, no guns have been fired; only fisticuffs are necessary.
But then the leader of the group invokes Kaali, and from the moun-
tains a flood of Thuggees on horseback launches a full-scale attack.
    The attack that will lead to the rooftop escape of the three
sergeants is marked by particular details, including the sergeants’
retreat to a gated compound and their ascent to its roof to escape the
attack. This sequence is fast paced and interspersed with humorous


    George Stevens: The American Character—Desire and Conscience
