commercially, but this boy had one merit superior actors do
   not have: He was the real thing. “America, America” is my
   favorite film both despite the performance in its central role
   and because of it.” (A Life, p. 629)

    When Kazan worked with Marlon Brando, Anthony Quinn,
Richard Widmark, or James Dean, the results are without compari-
son, the very best imaginable. Beyond the casting, it comes down to
the creative malleability of the actor and the vividness of Kazan’s
director’s idea. First, the look of the performance has to be real.
Second, the subtext keys the emotions surrounding that look.
Finally, the performance must have a certain level of energy, direct         199
as well as sexual.
    Terry Malloy is a boxer. As we would expect, he moves swiftly on
his feet. He wrestles with Edie when she tries to retrieve a ticket for
her father from Terry. His body motion looks like he is in a clinch
in the ring. Brando’s performance is driven by this reality about
Terry. Raymond Fitch in “Panic in the Streets” is a petty criminal
who is always being pushed around by someone—his wife, Blackie,
the police. Raymond is pliant to all these demanding characters. His
nervousness is a physical presence throughout. Mr. Sinnikoglou, on
the other hand, is not at all pliant in “America, America.” He is a
successful man who, unlike Stavros, carries himself with the pride
of success. His physical presence reflects the forcefulness of his
personality. When we look at his brothers, who are more pliant, we
understand he is the reason the business is a success. He is in all
matters forceful and successful.
    The next layer to these performances is the subtext or inner goal.
Terry is a man looking for a second chance, for redemption from
the loser image gained by going along with his brother’s request that
he throw fights to enrich Johnny Friendly. Terry sees Edie, a girl
brought up by nuns, as a new beginning for a person like him.
Raymond’s inner goal is to please people. He will do anything to
satisfy those he cares for. When faced with two strong and opposing
forces (e.g., his wife and Blackie), the man simply comes undone;
this quality is very much at the heart of Mostel’s performance.
Mr. Sinnikoglou is a worried man beneath all the forcefulness.
He has four daughters, and all are plain looking. His concern is
whether or not he will be able to marry them off. If he cannot, he


                                                 Elia Kazan: Drama as Life
