Wilder’s use of such elements as lighting, art direction, and sound was
           far more subtle. Pace also is secondary, and edit decisions were made
           to clarify the story progression. There are nevertheless some notable
           visual characterizations of Wilder films; for example, environments
           (sets) in Wilder films are important. Norma Desmond’s house in
           “Sunset Boulevard” is more museum than home, according to Gillis;
           it is a mausoleum memorializing the grandeur of the silent film period.
                The insurance company offices in “The Apartment” are cold
           and corporate. Wilder emphasized their regimented character, and
           when he filmed the Christmas party at the office he stressed the
           claustrophobic quality of the setting. Baxter’s apartment is also an
172        important environment in the film. The dominant quality of the
           apartment is how dark it is. It seems a center for feeling lonely rather
           than a warm hearth suitable for sexual pleasure. Fran’s suicide
           attempt is a key narrative event very much in harmony with the tone
           of the apartment, an act enabled by the environment.
                Another quality of Wilder’s visual style is the use of visual motifs.
           Usually these motifs are singular and support a character goal. In “The
           Lost Weekend,” the motifs are the whiskey bottle and a shot glass. The
           film opens on a whiskey bottle dangling out of an apartment window.
           When Don meets Helen, he is looking for the whiskey in his coat
           pocket, but the coat check mixed up the check slips and gave Don
           Helen’s coat. In short order the whiskey bottle falls out of Don’s coat
           pocket and shatters. Liquor stores have bottles prominently in the fore-
           ground just as bars have bottles lined up in the background. When
           Don has a drink after sending Helen and his brother off to a concert,
           the shot glass on the bar is in the foreground. To signify the number of
           drinks Don has had, Wilder went to a close-up of the condensation
           rings from a half dozen shot glasses. The condensation clearly marks
           the growing number of drinks Don has had. He drinks so much that
           he forgets to meet his brother to catch the late train.
                In “Sunset Boulevard,” the motif is the car. Losing his car will
           mean the end of Joe Gillis in Hollywood. When his car is repos-
           sessed from the Desmond garage, he becomes totally dependent on
           Norma. Later, he travels around, a kept man, in Norma Desmond’s
           limousine. The car that takes Norma and Joe to the Paramount stu-
           dios is the reason why Cecil De Mille invited Norma to visit his set,
           as he wants to rent the antique as a prop for his next film; however,
           Norma believed that De Mille was interested in her “Salome”


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
