“Alice Adams” (1935)
           “Alice Adams” is based on the Booth Tarkington novel of an
           ambitious but poor young woman in the Midwest who aspires to
           be more. The film focuses on Alice’s (Katharine Hepburn) chance
           to move ahead. She meets a rich young man (played by Fred
           MacMurray) who is bored by his socialite opportunities. Alice and
           her family have tried unsuccessfully to be what they are not—part
           of the establishment. The excerpt I use here is the disastrous dinner
           when Alice introduces the young man to her family. It is the hottest
           day of the year, the food is heavy, and the behavior of the family
           members is worse. For Alice, this dinner is a nightmare come true.
150

           “Gunga Din” (1939)
           “Gunga Din” is an action–adventure set in 19th-century Northern
           India, where the British army is combating a Thuggee uprising. The
           film focuses on three sergeants, McChesney (Victor McLaghlan),
           Cutter (Cary Grant), and Ballantyne (Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.). The
           waterboy, Gunga Din (Sam Jaffe), wants to be a soldier. His trans-
           formation from waterboy to posthumous military hero gives the film
           its emotional arc. The excerpt that I will focus on is the Thuggee
           attack in Tantrapur. The three sergeants have led a patrol to
           Tantrapur to repair a broken telegraph line and find out what hap-
           pened to the army contingent that had been located there. Instead,
           the patrol is attacked by the same force that destroyed the army
           contingent. The attack is the first time we see the three sergeants in
           action. They are confident and playful. The scene gives the action
           an almost comic or tongue-in-cheek tone. The skirmish is exciting
           and fun, a tone that the film sustains until the final act of the film.


           “The More the Merrier” (1943)
           “The More the Merrier” (1943) is a situation comedy set in
           Washington, D.C. during World War II. There is a housing short-
           age, and, doing her patriotic duty, Connie Mulligan (Jean Arthur)
           decides to sublet half of her apartment. Her ad draws many people
           but one of them, Benjamin Dingle (Charles Coburn), pretends to be
           the apartment’s proprietor and tells all the others to leave because
           the apartment has been rented. When Connie arrives home from
           work, Dingle presents himself and talks her into the rental. He is


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
