“I Shot Andy Warhol” (1995)
           “I Shot Andy Warhol” begins with the shooting of Andy Warhol
           (Jared Harris) in the late 1960s. It then moves back in time to tell the
           story of Valerie Solanas (Lily Taylor), the shooter. The flashback is
           framed as a case study with the examining psychologist as the lead
           narrator. Eventually Valerie herself will become the principal nar-
           rator. In docudrama style, the early part of the film mixes home
           movies of Valerie together with a filmed, stylized interview with
           Valerie, who reads from her manifesto, SCUM. This early portion
           of the film focuses on her sexual history—the fact that she was
           sexually abused by her father, the fact that Valerie has declared her
306        preference for women, the fact that she made it her mission to be
           aggressive toward and rejecting of men, the fact that she earned
           tuition for college by prostituting herself.
               After college studies in psychology in Maryland, Valerie moves
           to New York and it is here that the balance of the film takes place.
           It is the 1960s. New York is edgy and attractive. Valerie affiliates with
           a subculture of lesbians and transsexuals. She panhandles and pros-
           titutes herself to pay her way. She sees herself as a writer. First she
           writes a feminist manifesto, SCUM, and then a play titled “Up Your
           Ass.” Both are virulently anti-male.
               Life is lively but marginal. Through her own efforts she meets
           Maurice Girodias (Lothaire Bluteau), a publisher of pornography.
           She also meets Candy Darling (Stephen Dorff), a transsexual who
           has begun to act in Andy Warhol movies. Valerie feels confident
           that Warhol will produce her play, but he doesn’t. When Girodias
           offers her a contract for a book she accepts but immediately begins
           to come apart at the seams. The pressure of performance makes
           Valerie paranoid and she becomes threatening to the key men in
           her life, Girodias and Warhol. Already marginalized by Warhol’s
           hangers-on, Valerie takes it out on Warhol and shoots him. This
           brief description does not do justice to the sexual/psychological
           portrait of a marginalized woman and the vivid portrait of the edgy
           celebrity scene of the Factory, Warhol’s window on his world, and
           the New York it made famous.
               The opening of “I Shot Andy Warhol” begins with Valerie
           Solanas having shot Andy Warhol. The gun is empty. A colleague of
           Warhol suggests that she leave. Valerie’s father sees his daughter on
           television, arrested for the shooting. She claims the reason for the


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
