“A Hole in My Heart” (2004)
“A Hole in My Heart” is Moodysson’s darkest film. There are four
characters, and the ostensible plot of the film is the making of a
pornographic film in urban Sweden. A father and son live in the
apartment where most of the action takes place. The son, Eric
(Björn Almroth), is long haired and has a birth defect—his right
hand is claw-like. He seems depressed and escapes into his music.
A rope hangs in the foreground of his room and seems to question
whether he will continue to live. The father, Rickard (Throsten
Flinck), is an alcoholic, rather dissipated, overweight, adolescent-
like male. He will make a pornographic film today in the apart-
ment. He invites Eric to watch but Eric is repulsed by what his             281
father does. Eric, more conservative than his father, is rebellious
against his father. When his father asks for a glass of water, Eric gives
him water from the toilet bowl.
    Geko (Goran Marjanovic), who will be the male in the film, is
young, muscular, and angry. He oozes hate and aggression. Tess
(Sanna Bråding), a 21-year-old woman appearing in the film, is there
because she is bored and the only enthusiasm she has in life is for sex.
    The through line of the film is the making of the porno film, but
as the performers and director get bored with what they are doing they
seek out more and more sensational actions for the film and for their
own personal needs to remain engaged and stimulated. Those actions
are increasingly about harming each other and themselves. Although
violence is threatened, the actions remain on the level of humiliation
and the loss of dignity. From a viewer’s point of view of the film, how-
ever, these actions have not been replicated in commercial or artistic
film since Pier Paolo Pasolini’s “Salo.” And they are a graphic repre-
sentation of what is being shown on screen is creatively exploitative
while at the same time critical of the human behavior depicted.
    In the midst of all this, Moodysson introduces a human heart
operation to save life while toys and sex scenes show exploitation of
life functions/behavior. These cutaways provide Moodysson the
opportunity to introduce his views on society and progress. To
humanize his four characters he has them at different points confess
to us their deepest aspirations and fantasies. In the case of Geko, the
least sympathetic character, he cuts back repeatedly to Geko’s pas-
toral fantasy (an escape from his behavior). His fantasy is escapist
and pastoral—to run away to golden fields, assume the fetal position,

                                 Lukas Moodysson: Empathy and Its Limits
