commit suicide. After leaving Agnes’ house, Elin and Jessica make
           their way to another party, where Johan waits impatiently for Elin. He
           is earnest but she is clearly not interested. Growing drunker, she con-
           siders hitching into Stockholm but instead returns to Agnes’ house,
           and she and Agnes have a sincere exchange during which they kiss
           again, giving Agnes hope.
               The next day at school Elin intentionally ignores Agnes’ feelings
           for her. Elin has decided that Agnes’ notion of a lesbian love rela-
           tionship may just be a cure for her boredom, and she thinks Agnes
           is more authentic than the other girls. Johan is crushed, but the
           story ends with Elin and Agnes celebrating their nonconformist
278        status in school, as lesbians. Both, for the moment, seem to have
           what they want. Agnes has Elin and Elin has a notoriety earned not
           on the normal terms (“how many boys have you slept with?”) but on
           her own terms (“how many of you have slept with a girl?”). In
           “Fucking Åmål,” we will focus on the opening, which introduces
           Agnes’ problem, Elin’s problem, and Johan’s desire. Each narrative
           thread comes back to Elin. How Moodysson manages multiple
           characters, goals, and stories energizes the opening of the film.

           “Together” (2000)
           “Together” is also a multiple-character narrative. It takes place on a
           commune in November 1975. The film opens with the news that
           Franco is dead. All the members of the Swedish commune cele-
           brate as if it is New Year’s Eve. The film follows Elisabeth (Lisa
           Lindgren), who is not a commune member. Elisabeth decides to
           leave her husband, Rolf (Michael Nyqvist), who has beaten her
           while drunk. She and her children, Eva and Stefan, will find refuge
           at Together, her brother Göran’s commune.
               The commune is made up of a divorced couple, Lasse (Ola
           Norell) and Anna (Jessica Liedberg). Anna has decided that males
           are oppressive and has declared herself a lesbian. They have a
           4-year-old son, Tet. Göran (Gustav Hammarsten) has a girlfriend,
           Lena (Anja Lundqvist), who is self-centered and very interested in
           open sexuality. Göran is conservative, idealistic, and very sweet. He
           seems to be the leader of the house. Klas (Shanti Roney) is gay and
           in love with Lasse. Eric (Olle Sarri) is doctrinaire and very Marxist.
           His father is a wealthy banker. Signe (Cecilia Frode) and Sigvard
           (Lars Frode) and their son, Måne, round out the population of


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
