3rd ed., Focal Press, 2003.) Both docudrama and hyperdrama are
genres that elevate voice. (See the chapters entitled “The Centrality
of Metagenres” and “The Ascent of Voice” in my book Global
Scriptwriting, Focal Press, 2001.) These genres of voice require that
the director distance us from the characters and here lies the risk of
these genres. These genres have a strong voice, but they do not
invite us to identify with their characters. And so we watch Valerie
Solanas in “I Shot Andy Warhol” and Patrick Bateman in
“American Psycho,” but we do not identify with them. Indeed, they
are characters we do not care for at all. By using the melodrama
structure, Patty Jenkins invites us to identify and care about Aileen,
the serial killer who is the main character of “Monster,” as intensely       303
as Allison Anders does with the young daughter in “Gas, Food and
Lodging” and as Amy Heckerling does with Emma in her situation
comedy, “Clueless.”
    To compensate for this loss of identification Harron has had to
undertake compensating strategies that strengthen the experience
of her films. These strategies include the use of irony and humor
with regard to her characters and the environment that nurtures
their narcissism. Another strategy is to have a powerful sense of time
and place. In “I Shot Andy Warhol,” 1960s New York with all its sub-
versive hedonism, is as much a character as the empty glamour of a
gentrified New York of the 1980s is in “American Psycho.” Finally,
Harron adopts a distinctive style that is vigorous and in line with the
genre she has chosen.
    Docudrama is a fiction film that looks like a documentary. A place,
a character, or an issue is organized around an idea about that place,
character, or issue. The organization of the narrative is the equivalent
of a case for or against. The character at the center of the narrative is
the vehicle for the case. “I Shot Andy Warhol” suggests that celebrity
appeals to a character who is utterly marginalized by her family history
and by society’s values. In the case of Valerie Solanas, celebrity is both
attractive and overwhelming. She wants it but she is afraid of it, and in
the end her resulting paranoia brings her the celebrity she so desper-
ately sought. She will forever be known as the woman who shot Andy
Warhol. Here, Harron used the docudrama story form to condemn the
celebrity culture and its root cause, the culture of narcissism.
    In “American Psycho,” the issues are similar. This time, the issue
is the emptiness that the culture of narcissism yields. Patrick


                                      Mary Harron: Celebrity and Banality
