Introduction

Mary Harron has directed interesting series television such as
“L Word” and “Homicide,” and she is now completing her third
feature film. Unlike the other case studies in this book, she has only
two feature film credits at the writing of this book, yet I feel that her
films are so distinctive that I am concluding the book with an exam-
ination of her work in those two films because her director’s idea is
so compelling. Mary Harron’s directors idea is to link celebrity and
banality. I will discuss those two films, “I Shot Andy Warhol” (1995)
and “American Psycho” (2000) shortly.
    First, an explanation about celebrity and banality, her director’s       301
idea. Other filmmakers have made films about the epicenters of
celebrity, Hollywood and television. Most often those films have
been satires, occasionally melodramas. The satires include Robert
Altman’s “The Player” and Sydney Lumet’s “Network.” The melo-
dramas include Elia Kazan’s “A Face in the Crowd” and Paul
Thomas Anderson’s “Boogie Nights.” Other filmmakers have taken
the more benign approach of situation comedy, including Sydney
Pollack’s “Tootsie,” James Brooks’ “Broadcast News,” and Woody
Allen’s “The Purple Rose of Cairo.” All of these films, in ways criti-
cal and less critical, address the issue of celebrity and values. Those
values range from the social and political to the ethical. All portray
a tradeoff between celebrity or narcissistic values and humanistic or
altruistic values.
    Mary Harron’s work differs from the above mentioned in an
important respect. Her characters are not celebrities but rather nar-
cissistic characters that identify with celebrity. They want and need
their 15 minutes of fame, and her work explores their desperate
obsession with those 15 minutes. In this sense, her characters are a
part of a new phenomenon, new at least since Christopher Lasch
wrote about the culture of narcissism in his book The Culture of
Narcissism (1979). That culture has elevated popular music and its
stars, popular art and its stars, and fashion and its stars to iconic lev-
els. The upshot today is reality television and its centerpiece,
“American Idol.” This is the cultural terrain that Harron’s characters
occupy. They are intense wannabes. The inner life of these char-
acters clashes with their outer reality. Their major talent is their
desire and here they merge with the superficiality of celebrity.

                                      Mary Harron: Celebrity and Banality
