“The Informer” (1935), “The Grapes of Wrath” (1940), “How Green
           Was My Valley” (1941), and “The Quiet Man” (1952). Critical atten-
           tion was also focused on “Young Mr. Lincoln” (1939) and “They
           Were Expendable” (1945). Ford is the director most honored by his
           peers in the history of Hollywood.
              In order to understand this unusual director and to highlight
           his director’s idea, we need only look at his approach to the
           Western. This pastoral form was ideal for Ford, a man who wanted
           to highlight the best in his characters. The Western, representing
           the past, was a story form best known for its visuality and its action.
           Various directors have filmed Westerns according to their particu-
136        lar views of the West. Budd Boetticher saw the West as a place
           where primitivism brought out the worst in its inhabitants. Ford’s
           characters were not the neurotics that inhabited the Anthony
           Mann Western nor were they the disillusioned romantics of Sam
           Peckinpah’s West. Instead, they were men seeking an ideal. They
           were skilled and capable but they were also hard men. If they were
           wronged, they sought justice (“My Darling Clementine”) and
           sometimes revenge (“The Searchers”). But underneath it all, these
           characters lived by a code of honor. They would have been as at
           home in King Arthur’s Camelot as they were in John Ford’s
           Monument Valley.
              These same values—justice, fairness, respect for differences,
           respect for family and culture—characterize Ford’s non-Western
           characters as well. Tom Joad (“The Grapes of Wrath”), John
           Brinkley (“They Were Expendable”), and Abraham Lincoln
           (“Young Mr. Lincoln”) represent the Ford hero in other settings.
           The challenges confronting these characters differ—economic
           hardship, warfare, poverty—but Ford’s heroes all demonstrate a
           capacity to persevere, not simply to survive, and to stand up and rep-
           resent positivity in life, whatever the outcome.
              I have chosen the following four scenes to highlight Ford’s
           director’s ideas:

              1. Muley’s story from “The Grapes of Wrath”
              2. The marshal’s lady scene from “My Darling Clementine”
              3. The hospital scenes from “They Were Expendable”
              4. The search for cattle to the search for killers following the
                 murder raid in “The Searchers”


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
