Bateman is a Harvard graduate, a vice president in a corporation
       whose function is to market. He is by society’s measure a success,
       but inside he is empty. As his narcissistic needs grow he fills himself
       with a hateful, murderous inner life that totally disconnects him
       from the real or external world. The moral of the story is that the
       culture of narcissism is empty on the inside but looks great on the
       outside. For Harron, that culture is destructive and she chose the
       moral fable to shape her cautionary tale. It is notable that
       “American Psycho” was released in the same year Stanley Kubrick
       released his cautionary fable, “Eyes Wide Shut.” The difference is
       that Kubrick’s treatment is genteel compared to the nightmare
304    Harron has created. Both, however, are cautionary tales about the
       dangers of the narcissistic culture.
           Before I describe the excerpts I will use to illustrate the director’s
       idea, let’s examine the strategies Harron uses to embed the director’s
       idea in the narrative. These strategies will contextualize the discus-
       sion to follow. If the director’s idea requires a linkage between
       celebrity and banality, Harron must make each appealing and repel-
       lent. In other words, she must embed in the character of celebrity an
       allure as well as a banality. In the banality there is so much despera-
       tion for a wish of celebrity acknowledgment that pathos for the char-
       acter is created. To do so, Harron takes a paradoxical approach to
       character and place in her two films. Specifically, New York is an
       exciting as well as callow and cruel environment in “I Shot Andy
       Warhol.” In “American Psycho,” the environment is all about the
       power of steel and affluence as well as superficiality, the plastic qual-
       ity at the center of narcissistic consumerism. Its very coldness is what
       makes New York dangerous for its inhabitants in “American Psycho.”
           Similarly, in her approach to character she includes both nega-
       tive and positive characters. The negative characters occupy the
       celebrity status in “I Shot Andy Warhol.” They are the occupants of
       the Factory, Andy Warhol and his hangers-on. The publisher of
       pornography, Maurice Girodias, is another negative character. The
       positive characters are the lesbians around Valerie Solanas, includ-
       ing the transsexual Candy Darling. Their desire for recognition and
       their marginal status positions them as opposites of the celebrities
       and would-be celebrities. Valerie herself is the narrator and witness
       to both sides. She provides the baseline entry into the world of
       celebrity in the New York of the 1960s.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
