in “Barry Lyndon” is always operating out of a shallow narcissism, as
is Tom Cruise in “Eyes Wide Shut.” This narrowness worked well
with powerful actors such as James Mason and Peter Sellers in
“Lolita.” The strategy also worked well where the look of the actor
had to imply the shallowness of a character. All the more remark-
able, then, is the fact that the initial criticism of “Barry Lyndon”
focused in good part on the casting of Ryan O’Neal. Now, 30 years
later, “Barry Lyndon” is considered one of the great Kubrick films
and the casting of Ryan O’Neal is no longer a source of criticism.
    Notable is that all the actors and casting choices I have men-
tioned are men. This is because Kubrick’s films are focused on the
male characters and the male point of view. Although Shelley                243
Winters gave a significant performance in “Lolita,” as did Marie
Windsor in “The Killing,” Kubrick films are primarily about men,
and “Full Metal Jacket” and “Paths of Glory” (at least until the epi-
logue) are exclusively about men.


Directing the Camera

Like Max Ophuls (“Lola Montes”), Orson Welles (“Citizen Kane”),
Carol Reed (“Odd Man Out”), and David Lean (“Oliver Twist”),
Kubrick was obsessed with what he could do with camera move-
ment as opposed to editing a series of shots. And, like these direc-
tors, Kubrick was an aesthetic explorer into the possibilities and
impact of camera movement as much as he was a narrative director
telling a story. He chose to move the camera about the chateau in
the interior scenes in “Paths of Glory” as much for the joy of the
movement as for the benefit of the narrative. Kubrick also enjoyed
using pop music as reference points in his films, as well as such
technical challenges as using candle illumination for the interiors
in “Barry Lyndon.” These technical and aesthetic choices were the
equivalent of Kubrick telling a joke—all are amusing but they are
not the source of power in the Kubrick film.
    In this section, we are looking for that mixture of a director’s idea
and camera choices that yields filmic power. Many such examples
can be found in Kubrick’s work. First, let’s look at an editing idea:
I need to transport the audience to a different time, so I am going to
use the idea of time and how it is experienced as my editing idea.


                          Stanley Kubrick: The Darkness of Modern Life
