and behavioral, the actor projects. I would suggest that at this first
       meeting between the director and an actor and the reading that will
       follow that the director keep a list of criteria by which to assess the
       actor, such as:

          1. Professionalism
          2. Level of tension the actor brings to the situation
          3. Energy
          4. Charisma
          5. Sexuality

106    Hold onto the notion that the director should apply these same cri-
       teria to the actor’s subsequent reading and to the actor’s readings
       with other actors.
           First, we will address the issue of professionalism. By profession-
       alism, I mean showing up on time and responding to the interview
       in a professional manner. The actor is there to be hired for a role,
       and the director is there to hire an actor. When the meeting strays
       in any fashion from achieving these two goals, then the director and
       the actor are in unprofessional territory.
           The second issue is the level of tension the actor brings to the
       situation. When personality, desire, and opportunity mix, tension
       should result. How much tension is the actor able to produce? How
       is the actor managing and expressing that tension? Tension can
       become energy. As a director, I would be concerned if the actor is
       not able to produce the necessary tension. I would also be con-
       cerned if the actor’s coping strategy exceeded my expectations,
       given the circumstances (i.e., auditioning). Key here is that tension
       is expected and can be useful to the actor.
           The third issue is energy. Good actors know that no matter the
       type of film the essential result is energy. Happiness, sadness, anger,
       wit, and charm are all part of an energy field. Does the actor gener-
       ate that energy field or do they instead absorb the energy around
       them? Perhaps the reader is beginning to think that directors must
       have a psychology degree to cast. It is not necessary, but having a
       feel for people, understanding them and what makes them tick as
       human beings, helps.
           The fourth issue is charisma, which is a form of energy, but it
       links to something more specific—belief, intense, aggressively held,


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
