when a community leader suggests that he has never read anything
           in the scripture against music the service becomes a square dance.
           The scene is set on a platform, the foundation of the future church.
           The water tower and a flag are all that seem established and
           complete. A shy Wyatt Earp asks Clementine to dance and as they
           do the townspeople make way for “the marshal and his lady fair.”
               The scene has two parts: Wyatt Earp and Clementine making
           their way through the town to the site and the dance on the site
           itself. The purpose of the scene is to establish some decency in a
           town full of hooligans whose constant misbehavior requires a sheriff
           such as Wyatt Earp. There is a good deal of humor in the scene.
140        Besides the remarks and attitude of the community leader (uncleri-
           cal at best), the opening conversation between Clementine and
           Wyatt Earp has Clementine commenting on the morning smell
           of the desert air. Wyatt responds it’s not the desert; “it’s me, barber.”
           He was wearing a cologne the barber had used as aftershave. Here,
           the humor lightens up the obvious tension a shy Wyatt Earp feels in
           the presence of Clementine.
               In “They Were Expendable,” the plot concerns the response of
           the American Navy (specifically, the PT boat commanders) to the
           Japanese invasion of the Philippines. Although the numerous battle
           scenes are impressive, most of the film focuses on the disappoint-
           ment of the two commanders in their assignments, which they
           consider to have minimal impact on the war. Duty in these terms
           requires respect for the chain of command, regardless of personal
           feeling. The director also pays a great deal of attention to the com-
           petitiveness and camaraderie of the crews, from commander to the
           most junior member. This camaraderie sustains these men as they
           endure losses and humiliation. One of the most powerful scenes is
           when crew members visit one of their own who is dying in the
           hospital. Although they pretend all is well, the scene ends with a
           frank acknowledgment between the commander, John Brinkley,
           and the crew member. They say goodbye without tears. It is a very
           powerful scene.
               The scene where Rusty Ryan is admitted to the hospital for an
           injury and meets nurse Sandy, who attends Rusty and falls in
           love with him, is a scene that adds nothing to the plot of the film
           but is one of the most powerful in the film. The focus is on four
           characters: Rusty, another injured officer, a doctor, and Sandy.


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
