He arrives at his office to the beat of “I’m Walking on
           Sunshine.” Here, too, the image is all surfaces with no substance.
           He comments not on the workday but rather on restaurant reser-
           vations and makes suggestions regarding his secretary’s appear-
           ance. At that moment, her surface is more important than
           anything else. The opening of “American Psycho” establishes the
           main character’s priority (celebrity or nothing) and the tenuous-
           ness of celebrity status.
               The ending of “American Psycho” focuses on the puncturing
           of Patrick’s violent delusions. They are real on paper, as his secre-
           tary witnesses. They are, however, a fantasy, as Patrick’s lawyer
310        attests. Harry’s Club is banal, and Patrick’s colleagues are not con-
           tent; in fact, they are quite discontent as they want to be having
           dinner or at least have a reservation for dinner. Once Patrick real-
           izes that his murderous rages are fantasies, he deflates. The film
           ends with his narration, and the camera moves in on him, closer
           and closer, as he confesses that his confession has meant nothing.
           Not even the celebrity of murder is left him. He is banal and
           empty and he is in pain. There is no catharsis for this narcissistic
           character.


           Text Interpretation

           Celebrity can be seen as power, and the desire for celebrity can be
           interpreted as the desire for power. For Harron, banality is not a
           state of powerlessness; rather, she regards Andy Warhol and those
           around him, including the media, as banal, empty icons who have
           created a modern mythology of material fortune and fame together
           with a spiritual emptiness. Patrick uses the very word emptiness to
           characterize himself in “American Psycho.” In this sense, Harron is
           a critic of celebrity and of banality. Her characters are desperate for
           a better life but settle for celebrity because they know nothing else.
           As I mentioned earlier in the chapter, Harron’s use of voice-oriented
           genres, the docudrama in the case of “I Shot Andy Warhol” and the
           moral fable in the case of “American Psycho,” is her most important
           narrative decision.
               A second decision that enables us to grasp her interpretation is
           her choice to illustrate the dissonance between the inner voice


      The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
