is empathetic toward children, even a grown one like Eric in
“A Hole in My Heart,” and he views adult behavior as contemptible.
The men in both “Lilja 4-Ever” and “A Hole in My Heart” are hate-
ful and abusive toward children and women. This view of character
permeates all of Moodysson’s work.
    To understand the why of the children/adult fault line in
Moodysson’s work we need to think of him as a moralist embracing
a set of values in his work. Although values are central to the work
of Moodysson’s fellow countryman Lasse Hallström (“The Cider
House Rules”) and the independent filmmaker Alexander Payne
(“Sideways”), they are not a central focus for most directors.
    To highlight his exploration of values Moodysson has opted to         283
utilize two genres that put a clash of values at the core of the narra-
tive: situation comedy and melodrama. Because situation comedy
and melodrama can be considered to be opposites, this choice
becomes even more understandable. In “Fucking Åmål” and
“Together,” the dramatic arc is typical of a situation comedy. In
comedies, the clash of values emanates from child versus adult and
conformist versus nonconformist conflict. Moodysson uses a melo-
drama story frame for “Lilja 4-Ever” and “A Hole in My Heart.” In
the melodrama, the clash is exclusively between the child and
adult. The powerless children Lilja and Volodya struggle for their
dignity and a sense of power over their lives. In the melodrama,
however, the outcome is dark and unyielding. Only death provides
a playfulness and dignity absent in the lives of these two children.
The clash of values and the morality/immorality implications are
clear and foregrounded in Moodysson’s films.
    To support his interpretation of and empathy for his child char-
acters, Moodysson opts for transformation via relationships. Agnes
transforms Elin in “Fucking Åmål” and Göran is transformed by liv-
ing with his sister Elisabeth in “Together.” Plot is a barrier that has
a negative impact on Lilja in “Lilja 4-Ever” and on Eric and Rickard
in “A Hole in My Heart.” Interestingly, both plots have to do with
exploitation—the prostitution of Lilja in Sweden in “Lilja 4-Ever”
and the making of the porno film in “A Hole in My Heart.” For the
most part, plot occupies the adult tier in these stories and the char-
acter relationships for the most part occupy the child tier.
Moodysson the moralist is embedding empathy in relationships and
contempt within the plot.


                                Lukas Moodysson: Empathy and Its Limits
