classics with regard to the use of deep-focus foreground–background
          relationships to illustrate the core conflicts in their films.
              Fred Zinnemann was able to make complex stories emotionally
          available (“A Man for All Seasons”) or layered simple stories with
          complex subtext (“From Here to Eternity,” “High Noon”). This
          intelligent director kept on story in one of the most complex narra-
          tives of the 1970s, “The Day of the Jackal.” And, of course, Anthony
          Mann’s capacity to tell a story powerfully, economically, and in a
          visually powerful fashion marks his work from “T-Men” to “El Cid”
          and “The Heroes of Telemark.” All of these directors loved the
          visual power of the medium. They were not aesthetes, but their
52        voices, in part, reflected the pleasure they found in playing with the
          medium. Today, directors such as Quentin Tarantino are cele-
          brated for playing with the medium, but in an earlier time Anthony
          Mann, William Wyler, Fred Zinnemann, and Carol Reed were
          good directors who displayed an equivalent pleasure in visualizing
          their stories. This pleasure was an important component of their
          voices as directors.


          The Director’s Idea

          I have discussed the many ways in which a good director’s work
          differs from that of a competent director. What I have not yet added
          to the mix is the focal point of the director’s skills—the director’s
          idea, the magnifying lens that helps the director choose characteri-
          zation, narrative, and visualization strategies that will elevate the
          work to another level.
              In the case of Anthony Mann, his director’s ideas arose first and
          foremost out of the genre in which he was working. Generally, the
          Western tends to be a genre where the main character and the
          antagonist represent certain values. The main character represents
          pastoral values, romantic individualistic values that are associated
          with the past, the West. These values do not differ from the roman-
          tic values of the knights of the court of King Arthur. The antagonist,
          on the other hand, represents civilization and material values. He
          wants all the cattle, all the land, or all the money. The main char-
          acter and the antagonist do battle in the Western, ritualized battle,
          and the main character prevails. This romantic, even poetic notion


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
