director’s idea. How passionately does the director feel about the
premise? How should he approach the premise? In “Mr. Smith
Goes to Washington,” Frank Capra wanted to overvalue the idealis-
tic option of the premise for his main character, and he wanted to
demonize the other option (“realpolitique”) and its consequences
for personal behavior. This means that his director’s idea was to
overdo both options of the premise. Such an over-the-top approach
has its dangers (e.g., caricature and farce), but it also enables Capra
to be impassioned about his populist views.
    An important tool for articulating a director’s idea is creating back-
stories for characters and events in the film. The fact that Maximus
and Commodus, the main character and antagonist, respectively, in            21
“Gladiator,” were raised virtually as brothers makes their current
struggle more personal and more anguished. In Robert Aldrich’s
“Attack,” a Battle of the Bulge World War II story, the main character
and antagonist have a similar linkage. Back home in the south in the
United States, the antagonist’s father was the political boss. The main
character was a capable, ambitious young man, recognized by the
local political boss. The political boss asked the main character to
look out for his wayward, less capable son. Again, the tension of two
sons in conflict gives this war story deeper meaning. In both of these
film examples, the Cain–Abel factor became the director’s idea.
    Another avenue toward developing a director’s idea is to work
with a specific subtext to the narrative. “The Bourne Identity” is a
film with a big thriller plot about a CIA contract killer who has lost
his memory and is being pursued by his employer, who intends to
kill him. The subtext of the film is about loneliness, the deepest
kind of loneliness a human being can experience—the belief that
they have been abandoned. Director Doug Limans’s director’s idea
was to work with the loneliness not only of the main character
but also of other characters in the film. Remember the death scene
of the other contract killers? Each scene bespeaks the effects of
loneliness on the characters.
    The subtext of “All about Eve,” the great film about the theater
and stardom, is ambition, which takes each of the film’s characters
to different places. Joseph Mankiewicz used ambition as his direc-
tor’s idea and explored the vanity, depth, even desperation of ambi-
tion and subsequent loss of dignity experienced by each of the
characters. The greater the ambition, the greater the loss of dignity.


                                                         The Director’s Idea
