directorial decisions. That writing must emotionalize the personal
       story and provide the historical story intersection points so as to raise
       the stakes within the personal story. Another way of considering the
       two narrative elements is to see the plot as the historical story and
       the personal story as the character layer, the traditional means of
       emotionalizing the story. An example will illustrate the point. In
       “Rosenstrasse,” the personal story is about a contemporary German
       Jew who has grown up in New York. She is engaged to a gentile.
       When her father dies, her mother becomes very disapproving of her
       fiancé. To understand why, the daughter returns to Germany to
       learn of her mother’s past. What she discovers is that during World
262    War II in Germany her mother, a Jew, lost her parents and was hid-
       den by a German non-Jewish woman who at that time was fighting
       for the life of her husband, a Jew. Her husband has been rounded
       up by the authorities for transport east. The historical narrative has
       two aspects—the gentile woman caring for the Jewish child and the
       gentile woman fighting to rescue her Jewish husband together with
       like-minded women whose husbands have also been taken. The
       daughter learns her mother’s history by interviewing the woman
       who had saved her, now old and living mostly with her memories.
       The personal history and the historical fate of those women and
       their Jewish husbands during World War II blend to influence how
       a young woman today will make a decision about her gentile fiancé.
           A second take on the schism between the historical and the
       personal is that they are like the spokes of a wheel; they surround the
       core of the story. Parents in the Von Trotta narrative represent history
       while children represent the personal. An authoritarian pastor and
       his quiescent wife are the parents of the two daughters at the core of
       the story in “Marianne and Juliane.” Another schism in that story is
       the male/female divide. The men are needy and weak, and the two
       women are strong and goal directed; consequently, the men quickly
       fracture. “Marianne and Juliane” opens with Marianne’s former
       husband, Werner, leaving their child with Juliane and committing
       suicide. Near the end of the film, Wolfgang, Juliane’s boyfriend of
       ten years, abandons her because Marianne’s corpse is between them.
       In terms of the key relationship between the sisters, they are
       presented as bonded and allied since childhood; nevertheless, they
       are opposites of one another. As children, the older sister (Juliane)
       was responsible, the younger one irresponsible; the older less sexual,


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
