“Ninotchka” (1939)
In “Ninotchka,” the setting is Paris. The plot to sell Countess
Swana’s jewels is under way, but the three trade commissioners
from the U.S.S.R. are already intoxicated by capitalist Paris and
have failed in their mission. A new trade representative,
Ninotchka, has been sent to take over the negotiations. She is
appalled by what she has found (the opulent quarters, the pen-
chant of the trade commissioners for scantily clad cigarette girls).
The scene opens with the austere Ninotchka stepping out of the
hotel to inspect Paris from an engineering point of view, such as
visiting the Eiffel Tower.
    Ninotchka makes her way to the island in the middle of the            179
road. As she waits for traffic to clear, Count Leon d’Algout arrives
at the island from the opposite direction. Ninotchka asks Leon for
directions as well as information about the Eiffel Tower. He can-
not answer her questions and resorts to flirting with her. The sci-
entifically minded Ninotchka keeps the conversation technical
while Leon tries to keep it romantic. She looks at Leon as if he is
a species for study. He finds her surprising and finds himself
intrigued.
    The scene shifts to the Eiffel Tower. Leon has followed
Ninotchka there with romance in mind, but again Ninotchka seeks
technical information. The verbal jousting continues as they climb
to the top of the Eiffel Tower, the symbol of romance in the most
romantic city in the world. There, at the top, their relationship pro-
gresses when Ninotchka boasts of the superiority of the communist
system and Leon makes his case for capitalists. He points out a par-
ticularly charming site, an escape from the politics of the world—
his apartment. The scene then shifts to Leon’s home.
    In Leon’s apartment, Ninotchka encourages his manservant not
to be exploited by Leon. The manservant replies that, under the
communist system, he would have to share his savings and he is
appalled by that possibility. Leon dismisses the servant, and he and
Ninotchka get down to his agenda of embracing and kissing. The
technically minded Ninotchka considers the kissing to be strictly
physical, and Leon is growing increasingly exasperated by
Ninotchka’s rationalizations; however, it is clear that she is melting.
The scene ends with Leon and Ninotchka becoming more than
acquainted. Political and personal progress has been made.

                             Ernst Lubitsch: The Life Force of Romance
