gangsters are all 10 to 16 years old. Because the story arc follows the
tradition of the gangster film, we watch the rise and fall of a gang-
ster to his death. I suggest that “City of God” is an utterly political
reading of the narrative. The fact that a child has to become a gang-
ster to survive in his poverty-drenched environment implies a damn-
ing critique of the society the child has grown up within. To change
the prism for “City of God” we would need a broader community
perspective that would include members of the adult population,
parents as well as policemen. In order to interpret “City of God”
from a psychological perspective we would need to delve deeper
into the fears of the main character, the boy who becomes a
photographer. We would also have to delve deeper into the psyche              83
of the leader of the gang, the gangster who is finally killed to make
room for the next boy gangster. This might mean exploring their
relationships in far greater depth.
    A second example is Peter Weir’s “Master and Commander”
(2002), which has a powerful sociological dimension. In this narra-
tive we explore the culture of a British man o’ war at sea, focusing
on the roles of the officers and their men. The primary focus of the
story is on Captain Jack Aubrey and the ship doctor, Stephen
Maturin. Their friendship and their differences—the doctor, a
reflective man of science, and the captain, a man of action and
war—underpin the larger study of the community of the ship. The
experience of the Weir narrative is that the film is a study of the
importance of leadership in ensuring that the community, the ship,
can effectively carry out its responsibility, to execute the war against
the French navy. One can easily introduce the political by fleshing
out what the French enemy represents; the British values are well
represented. A psychological perspective, on the other hand, would
require a more specific examination of the issues of death, sexuality,
and relationships than is present in Weir’s version. Because Aubrey
and Maturin are already the prominent characters, they would be
the focus of deeper development.
    Finally, Wolfgang Becker’s “Goodbye Lenin” (2002) deals prin-
cipally with a boy’s love for his mother. What is he willing to do to
demonstrate that love and preserve her life? The answer is to pre-
tend that the Berlin Wall of 1988 still exists. The film takes place in
1990, and the Berlin Wall has fallen; however, stricken by a heart
attack, the boy’s mother has been in a coma during the regime


                                                        Text Interpretation
