discomfort lies in their flawed characters. The performances are
keyed to that discomfort and to its unheroic nature. They are rest-
less rather than objects of satire, disillusioned rather than unhappy.
The performances focus on the restlessness of the characters, char-
acters who do not understand, characters struggling for meaning.
Finally, both Kubrick and Polanski use the moving camera to a
greater extent than most directors. It is a searching camera, a prob-
ing camera, and its restless movement raises questions about
existence and meaning.
    If Polanski and Kubrick used the camera and performance to
explore the issue of existence, François Truffaut and Lukas
Moodysson have used the camera and performance to subvert and                327
challenge norms, the baseline of social and psychological existence.
That subversion can also be used to turn those norms over to reveal
new and stimulating alternatives. Truffaut in his embrace of chil-
dren, viewed rebellion as the expression of individuality, eccentric-
ity as a creative norm, relationships as the litmus test of aspiration
and happiness. To do all this, Truffaut peppered his narratives with
mischievous performances. Jean-Pierre Léaud as Antoine Doinel is
Truffaut’s alter ego. As the unreliable narrator of “Love on the Run,”
Léaud’s performance subverts the authenticity of the memoir of
Doinel in his sundry relationships past and present. The camera
movement between Doinel and his son and Colette in the train sta-
tion, their sighting of each other, and their eventual coming
together on the train after Colette has been reading about herself in
Antoine’s roman à clef links the characters together in a random
rather than urgent manner. The consequence is that the camera
lowers expectations for an eventual encounter. In a sense, Truffaut
used the camera to alter the traditional result of parallel editing, the
coming together of the two parties, in a more dramatically satisfying
and expected manner.
    In the case of Lukas Moodysson, subversion is also achieved
through a mix of camera and performance. The characters in
“Together” could be characterized as straight or conservative (e.g.,
Elisabeth and her children) or unconventional (e.g., her brothers
and fellow hippies). Key to the performances is that Elisabeth and
her children provide a baseline for behavior. Their presence
unmasks the conventionality of the others. By the time she leaves
the commune, the hippies have been transformed, their ideals


                                                                Conclusion
