The performances are also keyed away from the romantic aspects
of relationships and encounters. Warmth consequently is totally
absent from the performances until the last five minutes of the film.
The emphasis is on anger, overt and suppressed, as well as on the
inability or unwillingness of the characters to help one another.
Even those who are helpful (the waitress in a small café, the nurse
in the hospital) seem hesitant, as if they are deciding to help or
harm a character in spite of the fact that their jobs are essentially to
help the other.
    Kahn’s camera use is interesting. The road is photographed sub-
jectively, but most of the time the characters are observed through
more objective camera placements. The subjective road represents               19
danger and the opportunity for violence, rather than the excitement
or thrill of driving. Kahn also uses the jump cut to disrupt our sense
of continuity. The disruptive jump cut introduces violence into our
experience of the events and characters in the film. Kahn uses the
jump cut extensively throughout the film to instill the director’s idea
into the emotional flow of the film (the edit).
    Both of these simple stories, “The Ninth Day” and “Red Lights,”
illustrate how the director’s idea works to focus and lead our experi-
ence of the film. This is how a director’s idea adds value to the nar-
rative but most importantly how the director unifies the production.
    Directors use different strategies to find their director’s ideas. Of
course, personality, interest, and training are contextual elements
that dispose a director to a particular set of choices, but specific
aspects of a particular film can be considered that will help the
director move toward a clear director’s idea.
    In order to articulate the director’s idea it is first necessary for the
director to understand his attraction to a particular script. Generally,
directors are attracted to a script because of a particular character,
usually the main character, as well as that character’s life situation
and how the character has chosen to deal with it. To move toward a
director’s idea, it is important to fully understand whether we want
our main character to be a victim or a hero. Are we interested in their
psychology, their surroundings, and the sociology involved, or are we
more interested in the political dimension of their story? Every story
has elements of all of these dimensions. What attracts us?
    A second aspect is the importance of plot in the narrative. For
some directors, such as Steven Spielberg and Ridley Scott, plot is


                                                           The Director’s Idea
