an arm injury, and a nurse named Sandy (Donna Reed) tends to him.
       They form a relationship, but Rusty is resistant and wants to fight. The
       hospital staff wants to help him recover.

       “The Searchers” (1956)
       Ethan Edwards returns to his home in Texas after the Civil War. In
       short order, Indians massacre his brother, his brother’s wife, and their
       son. They take the two surviving daughters hostage. Ethan is deter-
       mined to rescue them and spends the next five years looking for the
       single surviving young niece (the older niece is killed by the Indians).
       He is aided by the adoptive son of the family, Martin. The sequence
138    I will focus on takes place early in the film. When their cattle are
       stolen, Ethan, Martin, and a posse pursue them, but the theft has been
       a ruse to get the men away from the farm. The Comanche Indians
       murder Ethan’s relatives and kidnap his nieces. The clip ends with the
       burial of his kin and the beginning of his search for his nieces.


       Text Interpretation

       John Ford’s approach to narrative differs considerably from his
       contemporaries—Howard Hawks and Henry Hathaway, for example.
       Hathaway, in “The Lives of a Bengal Lancer” (1936), is concerned
       with the behavior of his characters but far more of his energy is
       devoted to making the drive of the plot clear. Few filmmakers of the
       period were as strong on plot progression and impact as Hathaway. In
       “Scarface” (1932), on the other hand, Hawks had his hand on the
       pulse on the character and the plot, and he made sure each worked
       to augment the other. John Ford was different in that he couldn’t care
       less about plot. He always stayed close to character, and his films
       drifted back to the plot whenever necessary. “My Darling
       Clementine” provides a good example of this. Although the film
       opens with the loss of the Earp brothers’ cattle and the murder of their
       brother, the drive for justice or revenge essentially comes to a halt as
       Wyatt Earp takes on the job of marshal of Tombstone. He periodically
       encounters the rustler/killers, the Clantons, but the gunfight at the
       OK Corral is saved until the end of the film. In between, Ford
       explores Wyatt Earp’s relationship with Doc Holliday’s former
       fiancée, Clementine, and his relationship with Doc Holliday.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
