treatment of Hal the computer also raises the question of who is
the protagonist and who is the antagonist. The computer seems
victimized by the human, so Bowman, who eventually disconnects
Hal because of his arrogance and his actions, is put in the position
of antagonist.
    Another important feature of Kubrick’s interpretation was the
narrative, and in his narratives we can identify distinct choices he
made that promoted his director’s idea. Kubrick’s films have an
almost overabundant plot as compared to the character layer of the
film. One might suggest that people in Kubrick’s films are not as
important as the external events of the film. This was certainly
Raphael’s experience when he worked with Kubrick on the script of           241
“Eyes Wide Shut” (see his Eyes Wide Open). In “Full Metal Jacket,”
coping with external events, basic training, and the Battle of Hue
shaped the reactions of the characters, and in “Barry Lyndon,”
Redmond Barry is always reacting to external events—a duel, a war,
his actions to come up with clientele for a mentor, his cousin’s
efforts to marry well, his mother’s efforts to control his wife’s assets—
that all lead the character down the slippery slope that is his life.
A robbery and its course shape the reactions of the main character
and his colleagues in “The Killing.” In “Paths of Glory,” the attack
on the ant hill causes the general to deem his men cowards and to
designate three to die to restore the honor of the French army. Here,
the main character who led the charge on the ant hill is called upon
to defend the three men designated as cowards. Plot in each case is
powerful and has a formative effect on the main character. The
scale of the plot in each case overwhelms the main character.
    Finally, in terms of tone, Kubrick deployed irony to distance us
from the character and to amplify the power of the plot. I have
already mentioned the scene of Slim Pickens riding a nuclear
weapon toward its destination as if it were a bucking bronco, the ape
discovering that a bone could be a weapon, the bravado of the pla-
toon being filmed by a television crew with each acting as a per-
former, Alex dancing and beating his victim to the tune of “Singin’
in the Rain”—all of these actions and scenes deploy irony, but none
is on the level of Humbert Humbert in “Lolita” who marries the
girl’s mother to be nearer to the child. Kubrick brought the same
sense of irony to the suburban American values in “Lolita.” That
same irony is at play in “Eyes Wide Shut” but with urban material


                          Stanley Kubrick: The Darkness of Modern Life
