frighteningly believable quality. The Axelrod script bristles with
      irony about Cold War politics as well as the domestic divide on
      race—a black soldier dreams of the Communists as black church
      ladies and Marco, a white man, dreams of the Communists as white
      church ladies (pillars of their community). The Frankenheimer ver-
      sion also has humor—the newspaper columnist who sleeps in his
      dead wife’s nightgown; the costume party where Senator Jordan’s
      daughter, the lost love of Raymond Shaw, appears wearing a Queen
      of Hearts costume. The Queen of Hearts is the visual cue to put
      Raymond into a hypnotic state. This time instant obedience is to a
      good purpose—to advance his relationship with the woman he loves.
42        The Frankenheimer version also has daring scenes, such as the
      seductive train conversation between Marco, in the midst of a panic
      attack, and Rosie, the woman who becomes his love interest.
      Another such scene is the Raymond Shaw confessional scene
      (“I know I’m not loveable”), where Raymond recounts his relationship
      with Jocelyn Jordan at a time when he was loveable. The scene ends
      with his mother stepping in to destroy the relationship.
          The irony, the humor, and the audacious scenes are characteris-
      tic of the first version of the film but are absent in the later version.
      Frankenheimer’s director’s idea was to focus on power and power-
      lessness: political power and powerlessness, personal power and
      powerlessness. This idea arises from a less conscious substrata of the
      plot, the creation of an assassin for political purposes. To articulate
      how the director’s idea works, we must look first at the characteriza-
      tions. Raymond is powerless with regard to his relationship with his
      mother and his Communist handlers. Bennett Marco is also power-
      less and is a victim of his dreams. He is powerless as a military man
      subjected to political authority, and he is even more powerless as a
      troubled military man within the structure of the military. Power,
      on the other hand, is embedded in the Communists’ scientific ruth-
      lessness (evaluating the brainwashing apparatus by carrying out a
      murder at each stage of testing), in Raymond Shaw’s mother’s polit-
      ical power, and in Communist influence via Raymond’s mother
      over her Senator husband and through his nomination as vice pres-
      ident and candidate for his party.
          Visually, the theme of power and powerlessness is created by
      Frankenheimer’s camera choices. He often used a moving camera
      and wide-angle or deep-focus images to create a sense of power.


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
