Contemporary examples abound, including the Wachowski
          brothers’ film noir “Bound,” where the classic film noir, a woman’s
          betrayal of the main character, is altered to considered whether a
          female character will be betrayed by her lesbian lover. The answer of
          course is “no”; women do not betray other women. Oliver Stone’s
          “Alexander” examines the male and female dimensions of the great
          warrior king, and “Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon,” Ang Lee’s
          exploration of the male-dominated action–adventure genre, is utterly
          altered by focusing on two female main characters, one traditional
          and the other modern. These characters alter our experience of the
          superhero narrative. They also make Lee’s exploration the core of
82        the narrative (i.e., modern versus traditional) and depict a more
          universal struggle; consequently, the text speaks to a wider and older
          audience whereas the traditional action–adventure film tends to
          appeal to (young) males.


          Political/Sociological/Psychological

          Every story has political, sociological, and psychological overtones,
          but the filter the director uses determines whether the audience
          views the narrative as an international, national, local, or personal
          story. It all depends on the director’s choice of emphasis. We have
          already discussed the various ways in which “Hamlet” has been
          interpreted. The same choices face each storyteller. Few storytellers
          have been able to incorporate all three of the political, sociological,
          and psychological elements. Stanley Kubrick, in “Paths of Glory”
          and “Full Metal Jacket,” comes to mind as one who has done so.
          More often the director must choose to focus on only one or two of
          the elements. Costa-Gavras chose a political perspective in “Z” and
          “State of Siege.” Nicholas Ray chose a sociological perspective in
          “Rebel Without a Cause,” as did Todd Haynes in “Far From
          Heaven.” Alfred Hitchcock, on the other hand, is far more inter-
          ested in a psychological perspective in “Vertigo” and “Marnie.”
             To illustrate the degree of change possible by adopting a differ-
          ent filter we need only consider how different our experience of
          three films would be if the director had chosen an alternative inter-
          pretation. The first example we turn to is Fernando Meirelles’ “City
          of God” (2002). “City of God” is a classic gangster film, but the


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
