Lawrence Kasdan’s “Wyatt Earp” (1995), is revisionist and modern.
      In this iteration of the story, Earp is too human and flawed to be
      worthy of any mythical stature. Earp, the myth, is attacked and
      replaced by Earp, the man. A fourth version, George Cosmatos’
      “Tombstone” (1993), focuses on the power struggle between the
      Earps, who represent businessmen trying to get ahead, and the cow-
      boys, under Curly Bill and Johnny Ringo, an outlaw group who rob,
      intimidate, and kill for power. This struggle is not ritualized; it is
      brutal, and it is about killing—nothing redemptive or romantic
      here. Finally, a fifth version, again by John Sturges, “The Gunfight
      at the OK Corral” (1955), focuses on friendship, in this case the rela-
76    tionship of Wyatt Earp and Doc Holliday. The Clantons and Curly
      Bill become mere backdrops, although the film culminates with the
      famous gunfight. Each of these versions views the main character,
      Wyatt Earp, differently, and each interprets the core struggle
      differently. One might say that each of these readings approaches
      the historical narrative with a different text interpretation.


      The Case of Steinbeck’s East of Eden

      Good stories emanate from strong characterization and compelling
      plots. They also resonate with the ambitions of the writer. John
      Steinbeck, the author of East of Eden, earlier in his career wrote
      The Grapes of Wrath. In both of these novels, Steinbeck told family
      sagas set at particular points in U.S. history. He was also trying to say
      something about America. In The Grapes of Wrath, he linked the
      land and its future to the fate of its farmers, in this case the Joad fam-
      ily. Because of the Midwest drought and the Great Depression, the
      Joads were forced to abandon their family home in Oklahoma and
      head to California to begin a new life. Are the Joads victims of
      history or simply lumpen proletariats to be used up by capitalism’s
      endless appetite for cheap labor? This question is core to The
      Grapes of Wrath, as is the centrality of the Joads as the salt of the
      earth, America’s real strength.
          East of Eden is equally vested in an east–west family saga and a
      religion versus materialism struggle. This time, the family migration
      is voluntary rather than a necessity. Adam Trask leaves the family
      farm in Connecticut, while his brother, Charles, whom he has


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
