Rusty’s poor behavior as a patient is simply noted. The role of the
other injured officer is to illustrate how every patient falls in love
with Sandy. The doctor and the nurse are all about the business
of tending to the wounded. In this scene, their actions and com-
mitment are elevated above and beyond the call of duty by the
conditions. The hospital is a converted aircraft hangar; lighting
is poor and made poorer by the frequent air raids. Even if they
have to operate with Sandy holding a flashlight over the wound,
they will proceed. Just as John Brickley and Rusty Ryan accept
and work within the chain of command so too do these medical
professionals. They are committed to the preservation of life,
although they find themselves in a war zone, with an enemy                  141
aggressively advancing toward them.
    The scene establishes a sense of commitment to duty and, in the
case of Sandy, compassion for those men who lived and died in that
hospital. For Ford, these feelings are more important than plot details.
For Ford, it is all about character—its nature, values, and human face.
This is the narrative choice that engaged him most creatively.


Directing the Actors

John Ford’s approach to actors differs considerably from his
contemporaries such as Howard Hawks and Henry Hathaway, both
of whom were more interested in creating a greater elasticity or
character arc in their actors’ performances. John Ford had more
limited expectations of performance. To understand Ford’s
approach to directing actors, it is difficult to underestimate his
reliance on casting. Essentially, Ford tended to cast for type. For
leads, he gravitated to an actor with a particular persona—the
strength and decency of Henry Fonda, the determination and
passion of John Wayne. It is not surprising that these two actor/stars
formed their principal screen persona in their work with John Ford.
Notable and not unimportant is the fact that neither of these actors
had an especially modern persona, which made them suitable for
roles in Ford’s films, which so often took place in the past. Other
more modern actors such as William Holden, Richard Widmark,
and Sal Mineo worked less effectively with Ford. Ford’s actors had
to have a look that transcended time.


                                            John Ford: Poetry and Heroism
