long shot) should be taken. This master shot will provide general
      coverage for anything more specific that happens within the scene.
      Within the scene, the director should film mid shots and close-ups
      of the actors and dialogue that are important in the scene. Reaction
      shots should be filmed as separate shots even if they have already
      been recorded in a mid shot of two or more characters. This variety
      of shots will ensure match cutting of the long shots with mid shots
      or close-ups is achievable. Continuity also requires a respect for the
      use of screen direction within shots. When the director is filming a
      chase scene where one character is moving from left to right, then
      shots of the character who is chasing this character must also be
98    filmed using a left-to-right movement. Screen direction has to be
      consistent, whether filming long shots or close-ups. Alternatively,
      when two characters will meet each other in a scene, the first
      character could be filmed moving from left to right, for example,
      and the second character could be filmed moving from right to left,
      implying that these two characters are eventually going to meet.

      Clarity
      Stories can be confusing. It is the director’s job to provide those
      crucial shots that keep the story progression clear. Think of complex
      narratives such as Fred Zinnemann’s “The Day of the Jackal” and
      Robert Zemeckis’ “Back to the Future.” Two principles can help
      maintain the clarity of a narrative, the first of which is point of view.
      When a director provides a clear point of view throughout a scene,
      the audience will know how to interpret that scene. Think of all of
      those gunfights in Serge Leoni’s Westerns! In “Once Upon a Time
      in the West,” we are constantly put in the position of Charles
      Bronson’s character, who is facing Jack Elam and friends. From
      Bronson’s foreground point of view, we see Elam and colleagues
      in the background of the deep-focus shot. In the next shot, the point
      of view is Elam’s, or his holster, and in the background Bronson’s
      character awaits his fate. A clear point of view helps the audience
      move through a scene without confusion. A second principle that
      promotes clarity is the use of specific shots that tell us the true
      nature of a scene. The clock close-up in Zinnemann’s “High Noon”
      tells us that time is critical to the fate of our main character. The
      close-up of the missing index finger tells us we are in the presence
      of the antagonist in Alfred Hitchcock’s “The Thirty-Nine Steps.”


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
