“Stolen Kisses” (1968)
“Stolen Kisses,” the second feature film, opens with Antoine being
dishonorably discharged from the army. The narrative then follows
Antoine’s early work history and his love life. The film ends with the
growing seriousness of his relationship with his girlfriend, Christine.
The first scene we will discuss begins with his first work experience as
a night clerk in a small hotel. He is naïve when two men lie to him
to gain access to a woman’s hotel room. Antoine believes their story
and upon opening the door discovers the woman in bed with a man.
One of the two men he has let into the room is the woman’s husband,
and the other is a private detective. Antoine’s mistake leads to his
being fired, but the private detective offers Antoine a new career         207
opportunity as a private detective. In the next scene, Antoine practices
detective work by following an attractive woman. She sees him and
complains to a policeman. Antoine is not a very promising detective.


“Love on the Run” (1978)
The third Antoine Doinel film, “Bed and Board,” chronicled
Antoine’s marriage to Christine, the birth of their child, and the
result of Antoine’s infidelity on their marriage (it dissolves). “Love
on the Run” begins with Antoine’s divorce from Christine. His son
is now 10 years old. Antoine has published an autobiographical
novel. His first girlfriend, Colette, a character Truffaut highlighted
in his short “Antoine and Colette,” reappears. Colette is now a
lawyer and also having trouble in a relationship, and her story is
interwoven with Antoine’s story. There appears for a short time the
possibility that they will get together again but it does not happen.
In the end, Colette returns to her love, Sabine’s brother, Xavier.
Sabine is Antoine’s current girlfriend.
    In this excerpt, we begin with Antoine delivering his son to the
train station where he will depart for summer camp. Colette is also
at the train station, to take a train for Aix-en-Provence; however, at
first they do not see each other. Antoine calls Sabine to tell her he
cannot see her tonight, and she berates him for not thinking to invite
her to go with him to the station so she could meet his son. Antoine
is defensive and compartmentalized. It is all too complex for
Alphonse, his son, and in fact it is all too complicated for Antoine,
too. Piqued, he rushes off the phone. He exhorts Alphonse, who is


                                 François Truffaut: Celebrate the Child
