script supervisor is pragmatic (“I’d leave a guy for a film, but never
a film for a guy”). The prop man is anal retentive and the producer
is smooth as glycerin. Truffaut used the making of the film to cele-
brate filmmaking and to humanize the creative people who have
chosen filmmaking as their work.
    The scene that we will focus on is the death of the character
Pamela in a car accident. It begins with Alphonse’s girlfriend,
Liliane, saying goodbye to him before leaving for work. He thinks
she will only be gone for a few hours but he is wrong. When the
script supervisor (Natalie Baye) is headed for that day’s location, her
car breaks down. The prop man, Bernard, stops to help her change
the tire. She cleans up in a nearby pond, and the two decide to have      209
sex. She barely arrives in time at the location where an accident
scene is to be shot. The stuntman prepares for the shoot, and the
scene is shot from several angles. It is a success. The scene ends
back at the main location as the stuntman is leaving, but he is leav-
ing with Liliane, Alphonse’s girlfriend. Julie, the foreign star, tells
Liliane this will hurt Alphonse, and she should tell him what is
going on right away. Liliane casually says she is leaving Alphonse
because she was only hired on the film to please Alphonse, and
since Alphonse was becoming impossible she does not want to hang
around. Besides, she is in love. She and the stuntman leave.


Text Interpretation
Although Truffaut focuses on the celebration of the child, he does
not present the child as being the victim of an adult but rather as a
state of life where the spirit within is irrepressible. That spirit may
take on a certain nobility, such as in “The Wild Child.” More often,
however, the child is more of a rascal than a symbol of nobility.
Although the child is dependent on adults as parents or teachers,
there is independence to Truffaut’s child, a center all his or her
own. In this sense, Truffaut’s child is far from Ken Loach’s child in
“Wednesday’s Child” (1969) or Lyn Ramsey’s “Ratcatcher” (2000).
These children are victims of the adult world, whereas Truffaut’s
child is never a victim. The consequence is that we can admire the
child in Truffaut’s films, but we are not necessarily invited to be
sympathetic to the child. We watch his children occupy their own


                                 François Truffaut: Celebrate the Child
