Introduction

Catherine Breillat wrote her first novel at 17. By the time she made her
first film, “A Real Young Girl,” in 1975, she had written three other
novels and a stage play. Although her writing career continued she did
not direct another film until 1988, when she made “36 Fillette,” based
on her novel. Not until 1999 with “Romance” was her international
reputation established. Since then she has made films almost
annually, including “Fat Girl” (2001), “Brief Crossing” (2001), “The
Housekeeper” (2003), and “Anatomy of Hell” (2004).
    All of Breillat’s films focus on sexuality from the point of view
of a girl or a woman. All are sexually explicit, and all of the films      289
portray the obstacles women face, such as men in pursuit of
sexual satisfaction. The challenge for Breillat is to avoid being
aggressively pedantic or exploitative about her subject. She has to
reveal as well as surprise us with her subjects, and the work has to
succeed as a film experience. These are notable challenges, given
the way in which Breillat pursues her focus on women and their
sexuality. Characterization plays a role and is implied through
what appears to be an obsession with sex. Conventional plot
focuses only on the sexual act, such as the commercialized sex in
“Anatomy of Hell” and the making of a film in “Sex Is Comedy”
(2002). The consequence is a conscious sidestepping of the
conventional narrative tools. This does not make Breillat’s films
any easier to watch; on the contrary, it makes the films all the
more brave but difficult or provocative.
    To understand Breillat and her approach, her work must be con-
sidered within the contexts of women as directors (and women as
directors in France) and women as representations of culture. It is
telling that of the fourteen directors I discuss in the book only three
are women. (I have addressed this appalling statistic elsewhere; see
The Technique of Film and Video Editing, 3rd ed., Focal Press, 2002,
pp. 175–181.) Whether the reason is the politics of film or the eco-
nomics of the industry, the fact is that far fewer women than men
become film directors. Many who do tend to make assertive films
about the plight of women, such as Margarethe Von Trotta
(“Rosenstrasse”), Agnieszka Holland (“Olivier, Olivier”), Clara Law
(“Floating Life”), Deepa Mehta (“Fire”), Julie Dash (“Daughters of
the Dust”), Amy Heckerling (“Clueless”), and Angelica Huston

                           Catherine Breillat: The Warfare of Sexuality
