sees his mother’s grave. Everyone pressures him to make his life eas-
      ier and not return to Dachau, but in the end he does return, unwill-
      ing to yield to the demands of the Nazis.
          The story is simple, but Schlondorff’s director’s idea turns the
      film into an overwhelming experience. The director’s idea is that
      the world in 1942 became a black and white world. For most people
      it was black—their lives, their dignity, everything could be instantly
      taken away. On the other hand, there was the white world, filled
      with privilege, power, and seeming immortality. In the black world,
      violence and cruelty knew no bounds; in the white world, indul-
      gence and selfishness knew no bounds.
16        To work with this idea, we begin with the text interpretation. In
      Dachau, the focus is on death, cruelty, torture, humiliation. In
      Luxembourg, the settings are Father Henri’s family apartment,
      Gestapo headquarters, the church, the bishop’s office, and the
      cemetery. These latter environments seem untouched by what
      Dachau represents in the narrative.
          Two people are specifically seen as spiritual: Father Henri and a
      priest from Norway, who commits suicide as a result of his personal
      suffering in Dachau. Father Henri too suffers but he maintains his
      humanity in spite of the suffering. Father Henri’s brother is an indus-
      trialist who offers to save Henry by taking him to Paris. Father Henri’s
      pregnant sister offers to use all her connections to get Henri to
      Switzerland. In spite of the implications for each of them, the siblings
      need him to survive, as if he is the spiritual center of the family.
          Three other characters are important: the bishop, the power of
      the Church in Luxembourg; the bishop’s secretary, keen to accom-
      modate the Nazis; and a Gestapo official who almost became a
      priest but at the last moment saw more of a future with the SS. All
      are believers. All of these characters care, but self-interest in what-
      ever form motivates them. All live in the white world of power and
      have no understanding of true powerlessness and the black that rep-
      resents life and death in Dachau. The director’s idea of black and
      white frames the events of the narrative such that we see each event
      and each character as residing in one world or the other. When
      Father Henri chooses to return to Dachau, he is remaining spiritu-
      ally intact and embracing the blackness of the world he and his
      fellow priests occupy at Dachau. For him to accept the blackness
      means to never replace his spiritual wholeness with the material


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
