A second-level skill test in the reading is to pose the challenge of
       giving a different reading. Some directors will suggest an extreme
       situation—your mother has just died, you have just received a diag-
       nosis of pancreatic cancer—and ask the actor to read the scene
       again. The goal here is to test the flexibility of the actor. Can the
       actor give more than one reading? This exercise gives the director a
       sense of the actor’s range. Good actors will be able to give a wide
       range of interpretations—funny, sad, tragic. Such a challenge serves
       as a warm-up for the role. The actor’s flexibility is reflected in his or
       her interpretation of the character, which might differ from the
       director’s interpretation of the character. How interesting is the dif-
108    ference, and how stimulating is the person’s range as an actor?
           The third layer of the casting process, which may or may not be
       a separate session, is to have the actor read the part with another
       actor, another character. The same five criteria can be used to assess
       this reading. Is there a chemistry between the characters? If so, what
       is the nature of that chemistry? Do the actors connect or compete
       with each other? Competition is not necessarily bad; often it can be
       quite useful. This reading and subsequent readings with multiple
       actors can reveal whether or not the actor can sustain a connection
       with an audience. Does the actor command the audience’s atten-
       tion? Energy, charisma, and sexuality all work together to keep the
       audience—and the director—engaged.


       The Character Arc

       Characters all have particular physical and behavioral qualities.
       Beyond these qualities, deeper into a character’s psyche, is what can
       best be described as the character’s core. This core affects the narra-
       tive goal through its mix of desires and inhibitions. This “character
       lava” is what makes the character pulsate with life and above all cred-
       ibility. It is important for the director and the actor to create a char-
       acter arc and maintain it throughout the film. A main character must
       have the capacity to transform and indeed must undergo an actual
       transformation during the film. (More on this in a moment.)
       Secondary characters will have significant interactions with the main
       character that may help or harm the main character. What is critical
       is that these secondary characters are passionate enough in their


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
