Text Interpretation

Because Billy Wilder began as a writer and continued writing his
own screenplays throughout his directing and producing career, the
text has always remained clear and forceful. The virtues of Wilder
as a dialogue writer and a world-weary critic of capitalism and com-
munism are focal points of books written about Billy Wilder and his
work. Because my focus here is on his director’s idea, I will examine
one particular polarity that for me best illustrates how the existence
of characters in Wilder films is continually at stake—the coexis-
tence of extreme romanticism and extreme darkness, or cynicism, in
his characters and their stories. Wilder used the clash of these two         167
opposites to raise the stakes for his characters.
    Don Birnam, in the opening scene of “The Lost Weekend,” is
thinking only about the whiskey bottle that is outside of his window. In
the scene, he is ostensibly preparing to leave for a weekend with his
brother. The arrival of his fiancée, Helen, gives Don the opportunity
to appear altruistic when he suggests that his brother go to a concert
with Helen; however, we know that his true motivation is to be alone
with that whiskey bottle. When Don’s motives are uncovered, his
brother becomes cynical about Don’s intentions but Helen remains
the romantic. She is, as she will be throughout the film, optimistic and
hopeful that Don can overcome his addiction to alcohol. When Helen
and Don’s brother leave, Don lies to his cleaning lady in order to keep
the $10 his brother left for her. The scene ends cynically, implying that
Don’s little lie to the cleaning lady will become a bigger lie about the
weekend and about all other aspects of his life. What is important in
this scene is the existence of both romanticism and cynicism.
    Wilder used the same polarity in “Sunset Boulevard.” He set up the
main character with two women: the cynic, Norma Desmond, and the
romantic, Betty (Nancy Olson). Because of Betty and Joe’s love for her,
he finally decides to leave Norma Desmond. This decision leads to
Norma’s killing Joe in the scene that precedes Norma’s descent into
madness. In the madness scene, Wilder created a new polarity—the
romantic madness of Norma and the cynicism of the press, who have
been absent from her life since her career as a silent star ended. Now
that she is a murderess she is newsworthy again, and they are there
with their cameras. Norma’s madness is strangely romantic as she
assumes they are there for Norma Desmond, the star of the silver

                                          Billy Wilder: Existence at Stake
