favorite and he wants to keep her near him. Mr. Sinnikoglou
imagines how life will proceed with Stavros as part of his family.
He talks of the birth of a child, then another—two sons, that’s all
he wants. Any more than that is up to Stavros and Thomna to
decide (as if anyone could). Here, in Constantinople and at their
summer home, these two men will grow old together, cared for by
their women. Stavros only smiles as Mr. Sinnikoglou talks about
births and deaths here within this place and this family. The audi-
ence understands that Mr. Sinnikoglou’s imagined future is
exactly the opposite of the one Stavros sees; nevertheless, he does
not challenge the head of this household. The scene concludes
with a present. The entire family marches down the street to a              197
new apartment that Mr. Sinnikoglou gives to his future son-in-
law. The marriage that represents such a barrier to Stavros’ goal is
becoming more of a complication by the minute. The last shot
shows the daughter sitting in her father’s lap, as if a child, won-
dering what it will be like to leave her father for another man.
The image suggests it will be more than complex. Thomna wants
Stavros’ opinion on the offers of a life for Stavros—a wife, the
apartment, her family—and the father ushers the family away to
allow the couple a few moments alone.


Text Interpretation
Drama is life is the director’s idea. In order to work with this idea,
Kazan had to convince us of the credibility of his characters and
the situations in which they found themselves. He also had to infuse
the character and the situation with enough conflict to raise the
material beyond realism, bringing it much closer to the hyperdra-
matic form of theater or even opera. Our interpretations should
focus on the factors that complicate the apparent narrative purpose
of the scene.
    We begin with the simplest scene, the opening of “East of Eden.”
The straightforward narrative purpose is to show Cal looking for and
finding his mother. Conflict begins with the mother in that she does
not want to be found. In addition to asking the girl about Cal, she
sends her man out after him. An additional complication here is
that, although Kate is a madam, she does not see Cal sexually, but


                                                Elia Kazan: Drama as Life
