is open to interpretation. Once Alice begins to dance with the hand-
some Hungarian, the camera again moves, left to right, right to left,
simulating the seductive movement of a dance. The movement also
seems to center them to the exclusion of others at the party (except
for Bill). The proximity of the camera to the dancing couple also
raises the seductive quality of their proximity to one another. Again,
the restlessness of the camera creates a feeling. In both of these
scenes, the movements have a self-absorbed quality and a sexual qual-
ity. The camera movement furthers Kubrick’s ideas about the source
of the restlessness or the dissatisfaction of these characters. This rest-
lessness, of course, goes right to the heart of Kubrick’s director’s idea.
    Finally let’s look at the sniper attack in “Full Metal Jacket.” It       245
exemplifies how Kubrick used point of view to convey the idea
that war is all about killing and fighting to retain one’s humanity.
The sequence has two phases—the sniper’s attack on the platoon
and the platoon’s attack on the sniper. In the first phase, Kubrick
applied cinéma vérité strategies, such as the hand-held camera, the
extensive use of camera movement, and the strategic use of close-
ups, to give the audience a feeling of being under attack. During
this phase, three members of the platoon, including its leader,
Cowboy, are killed. The deaths are sudden and violent.
    In the second phase of the attack, the attack on the sniper, the
pace slows down and many static shots replace the moving shots. In
this scene, only one person, the sniper, is killed. This scene has many
more close-ups than the scene that preceded it. In this scene, Joker’s
decision about killing the young female sniper who wants to be killed
is presented as intense and painful and in close-up. The aggression of
the rest of the platoon toward the enemy contrasts sharply with Joker’s
conflicted feelings about killing. When he does shoot her it is his
humane response to a suffering person rather than revenge against a
hated enemy who moments before had killed his only friend in the
platoon. By slowing down the scene and focusing on Joker’s dilemma,
Kubrick humanized the enemy and created a paradox for the viewer.
If my enemy is human can he remain my enemy? This is the conse-
quence of Kubrick’s director’s idea in “Full Metal Jacket.” Modern
war is the largest shadow cast over modern life. Killing is killing,
whether in its modern version or a more ancient form.
    Few directors are more powerful than Stanley Kubrick when he
deployed the camera and the edit to his director’s idea.


                           Stanley Kubrick: The Darkness of Modern Life
