will have no male to carry on his name; consequently, he is eager to
       buy a son-in-law. This is why he offers a generous dowry. This is why
       he buys Stavros and Thomna an apartment nearby. He is forceful
       but he is also almost desperate to secure a marriage.
           Another quality that is critical to the performance is the energy.
       In the case of Terry, beyond the physicality and beyond the inner
       goal is Brando’s sexual energy. The famous scene where Terry is
       playing with Edie’s glove as they sit on playground swings getting to
       know one another is brimming with what is unsaid. Terry’s handling
       of the glove illustrates a desire that runs through the entire per-
       formance. Even the scene with Charlie in the cab has a physical
200    dimension and an intimacy that has little to do with the narrative
       content and everything to do with Brando’s energetic and authentic
       flow of desire in the scene.
           Raymond, like Blackie, has his own physical moments, particu-
       larly when it comes to dealing with a sick person such as Poldi. Like
       Blackie, he is animated, enthusiastic, and physical with Poldi. The
       consequence is a charm that could be misleading. If we did not
       know Raymond’s agenda, to get Poldi’s secret for Blackie, we could
       easily mistake the two men for lovers. Mr. Sinnikoglou and his
       daughter are not lovers; they are father and daughter, but just as
       the daughter embraces the father seeking protection against the
       unknown (marriage to a stranger), the father embraces the daughter
       possessively. He does not want to lose her. As he physically possesses
       her he hopes to hold onto his favorite by buying her a husband
       and binding him to the inner circle of his family. Paul Mann is
       shamelessly sexual in this scene with his daughter. Does he cross a
       boundary with her? Yes, but this is one of those dangerous areas
       where Kazan wants to take the audience in each of his films.


       Directing the Camera

       As I mentioned earlier in the chapter, Kazan articulates his
       director’s idea by using alternatively a highly theatrical style and
       a documentary style. The model for “Panic in the Streets” seems to
       be Fritz Lang’s “M” (1931), in which a child molester is the danger
       and unorthodox means are required to bring him to justice. In
       “Panic in the Streets,” a pneumonic plague is the danger, and again


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
