The shot of what the James Stewart character sees when he looks
down from great heights (an unstable sense of the ground—it seems
to move) is all we need to understand the character’s fear of heights,
a state central to the plot of Hitchcock’s “Vertigo.” The key here is
planning specific shots that help keep the motivation, plot, and
character clear.

Dramatic Emphasis
Dramatic emphasis can be achieved in a number of ways. The most
obvious is to use a close-up rather than a mid or long shot. The
close-up has the greatest emotional impact, a core notion for dra-
matic impact. A second strategy to suggest dramatic emphasis is to            99
move the camera closer to the action of the scene—the closer to the
action, the more intense our response to the content of the scene.
An alternative strategy here is to consider the shift from objective to
subjective placement or the reverse. Such a change will get the
audience’s attention. A fourth strategy, if shots have been static, is to
shift to moving shots or vice versa; in this way, the audience will be
alerted to changes in the scene. Finally, dramatic emphasis can be
achieved by changing the pace of a scene. When the pace has been
slow and deliberate, a shift to a faster pace can cue in the audience
that what they are now seeing is more important to the narrative
than the shots that preceded it.

New Ideas
New ideas are introduced in a scene by the use of cutaways.
Cutaways can be used to foreshadow what is to come, to introduce
a new character into the story, or to introduce a new possibility into
a character’s life. Think of the shot of a hatted Andie McDowell in
“Four Weddings and a Funeral” or the first murderous dream of the
Annette Bening character in Neil Jordan’s “In Dreams.” In both
cases, a new person or new reality is being introduced in the narra-
tive. The cutaway is a classic shot that introduces new ideas into the
narrative.

Parallel Action
The use of parallel action has been around as an editing idea since
Porter and Griffith—over a hundred years. The best way to explain
it is to suggest that separate strands of a narrative will eventually


                                                                 The Camera
