Baxter’s apartment is used. Mr. Kirkaby is trying to hurry his mistress
       home while outside Baxter waits for his apartment to be free.
       Kirkaby’s heightened self-interest knows no bounds, and he suggests
       that Baxter update his liquor supplies. The second scene focuses on
       Baxter’s loneliness—warming up a TV dinner and drinking
       Kirkaby’s leftover martini. Baxter is misunderstood by his neighbors.
       Given all the commotion and drinking next door, they think he is
       an iron man. The third scene introduces another participating exec-
       utive when Mr. Dobisch calls from a bar. Baxter has already taken
       a sleeping pill but agrees to Dobisch’s unreasonable request.
       Dobisch arrives with his Marilyn Monroe look-alike and the party
166    begins. The final scene focuses on the neighbors’ misperceptions of
       Baxter, juxtaposed with Baxter waiting in the park, cold, tired, and
       feeling abused.

       “Double Indemnity” (1944)
       The last excerpts I will use are the meeting and parting scenes
       between Walter Neff (Fred MacMurray) and Phyllis Dietrichson
       (Barbara Stanwyck) in “Double Indemnity.” The first meeting of
       Neff and his love interest proceeds as a seduction. Neff arrives to
       renew Mr. Dietrichson’s auto insurance. Dietrichson is not home
       but his wife is, and she greets Neff wearing only a towel. After she
       has dressed she comes back downstairs, and a verbal seduction fol-
       lows. Neff is more interested in her ankle bracelet than he is in her
       insurance status. She, on the other hand, is quite interested in insur-
       ance. Neff presses on and becomes more forward. She stops him
       cold but not without some encouragement. She invites him to
       return the next evening. The final meeting between Neff and
       Phyllis follows Neff’s discovery that she has been two-timing him
       with her stepdaughter’s boyfriend. He comes to see her with the
       knowledge that claims adjuster Barton Keyes (Edward G. Robinson)
       believes Phyllis murdered her husband and that the boyfriend was
       her accomplice. For Neff, the purpose of this meeting is to end
       his association with Phyllis. Whether he feels the spurned lover or
       simply the foolish victim of Phyllis’ attention and affection, he is
       here to break with her, but no one breaks with Phyllis. She shoots
       Neff but is unable to finish him off, realizing that she loves him.
       Neff kills her and leaves to confess his sins on tape for Keyes. Both
       scenes drip with desire and danger.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
