might be pleasure, it might be pain, it might be biological, it might
       simply be about procreation. It is rarely about what so many songs
       have been written about, love. And, because it is a power struggle,
       there is an antagonist. It might be the self as in “Anatomy of Hell.”
       More often, though, it is men—the actor in “Sex Is Comedy,” the
       boyfriend in “Romance.” The antagonist might also be society’s
       preference for beauty, such as in “Fat Girl.” Often, the outcome of
       the power struggle is provided—the violent deaths of the mother
       and sister in “Fat Girl,” the rape in “Fat Girl,” the death of the
       boyfriend in “Romance.” Breillat’s films may be all about sex, but
       they are also about the emotional and physical violence that so
292    often accompanies power struggles. Breillat views the sexual act as a
       power struggle for primacy, for satisfaction, and for satisfying the
       many needs of her characters.

       “Romance” (1999)
       “Romance” is the story of Marie (Caroline Ducey), a young teacher
       who has a boyfriend who is a male model. Since they have been liv-
       ing together he has backed away from having sexual relations.
       Although she craves sex he is turned off by the thought and absten-
       tion is their current sexual status. She seeks out sexual encounters
       while remaining in the relationship with her boyfriend. She picks
       up someone in a club and they plan an encounter the next day. Her
       headmaster seems supportive, but that support evolves into a sado-
       masochistic encounter with him. She also has a casual encounter
       on the street on her way home one day. After all of these encounters
       she has returned to the boyfriend. For her encounter with the head-
       master, she dresses in red. Until this point white had been her color
       of choice. Whether it is the dress or something else, the boyfriend
       wants to have sex and she becomes pregnant from the one
       encounter. At the doctor’s office, all the residents (male and female)
       as well as the doctor give her a vaginal examination. This scene
       seems violent, or at least a violation. In her relationship with her
       boyfriend, the violence takes on an emotional character. At a club
       one night, the boyfriend dances sensually with others, totally ignor-
       ing her, and that makes her angry. When she leaves in the morning
       he is asleep. She turns on the gas and after she has left the apart-
       ment it explodes and burns. Marie goes into labor. The headmaster
       is present and is passing himself off as the father. We see the birth,


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
