Turning to the various readings or interpretations of “Hamlet,” a
          famous interpretation by Lawrence Olivier views the narrative as a
          psychological portrait of Hamlet. Here, the neurotic Hamlet is front
          and center. He has an oedipal relationship with his mother, he is
          totally out of sync in his relationship with Ophelia (that is, he is
          incapable of a healthy love relationship), and he seems to have
          trouble with men. The ghost could represent a rekindling of his
          negativity or his hatred of men projected outward. Indeed, the ghost
          of his father is imagined. Hamlet is a troubled teenager working out
          growing up, but he fails (echoes of Columbine).
              A more straightforward interpretation is the Zeffirelli version
74        with Mel Gibson. Here, the injustice of regicide leads a loving son
          to seek revenge for his father’s death. The character of Hamlet is
          more stable, a worthy king-in-the-making if he survives to become
          king. In this version, psychology takes a back seat to the plot;
          Hamlet must revenge his father’s death. Plot becomes more impor-
          tant than character, the opposite of the case in the Olivier version.
              A third version is Kenneth Branagh’s treatment (the longest of
          the three). In the Branagh version, the trappings of power, the court,
          the castle, and the kingdom of Denmark are far more important. In
          this reading what is at stake for Hamlet (the crown and the king-
          dom) is far more central. The externalities distance the reading
          even further from the internal issues of the Olivier version.
              The issue here is not to suggest the supremacy of one version
          over another, but rather to suggest that one story, “Hamlet,” has
          yielded three very different interpretations. We could add the nos-
          talgic Kozintsev version in which something grand was lost in the
          passing of the kingdom from one king, Hamlet’s father, to another,
          Hamlet’s uncle. Kozintsev is romanticizing the past and provides yet
          another interpretation.
              Whether the director takes an internal or psychological reading,
          an intergenerational reading, an interfamilial reading, or a more
          externalized political reading, the critical point is that every good
          story is subject to numerous interpretations. If we shift from
          “Hamlet” to “Romeo and Juliet,” we can further explore these
          perspectives in this tragic love story.
              Baz Luhrmann, the latest director to retell the “Romeo and
          Juliet” story, moved the location and time from 16th-century Italy to
          20th-century Mexico. Leonard Bernstein and company set “Romeo


     The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
