goal, beyond being an individual and his own person, is to please his
       father, Don Corleone. This perception is critical because on a deep
       level it motivates Michael’s character. The spine can and should
       underlie the character’s actions in every scene.
           Taking this into the social realm, we see Michael’s goal as part of
       a story subtext in “The Godfather.” Whenever Michael, his father
       (the Don), and other members of the family are gathered, whether
       the scene addresses professional or personal issues, the subtext is the
       same—the threat to the family is ongoing, and everything should be
       done to preserve the family. The outside world must remain outside,
       and efforts to preserve the family must be constant. The actor
116    should be aware of this subtext if he is to build his character. The
       third component underlying performance is the presence of obsta-
       cles. The actor must constantly be aware of obstacles. In one scene,
       the obstacle might be simple and easily overcome, but over a
       sequence of scenes the obstacles should grow larger and more var-
       ied. Obstacles are useful to the actor. They are signposts bringing
       the spine of the character into sharper relief. Spine, subtext, and
       obstacles form the general outlines of the character, and specific
       mechanical devices can aid the actor in the actual moment-to-
       moment creation of the character.
           Objective, intention, image, fact, sense of belief, physical life,
       specifics, and listening all contribute to the creation of a character.
       By objective, Weston really means two elements. The first element
       is a conscious short-term objective in a scene; this can be as simple
       as walking to a window or pouring a cup of coffee. The second
       objective is unconscious and emotional. By pouring a cup of coffee
       for his wife, a character can illustrate how service even in its sim-
       plest form can be used to gain the approval of another (in this case,
       the wife). Such a scene can serve to illustrate that the character has
       an unconscious objective to seek approval. One can imagine how
       this objective manifests itself in the workplace, in circumstances
       where the character himself seeks service. Does this character feel
       uncomfortable, for example, when others provide service to him?
       This is how the unconscious objective works and when it is operat-
       ing it implies a living, thinking, feeling person.
           Intention involves the actor’s reaching for an objective and the
       means required to make the objective more attainable. What would
       the character do to achieve an objective? Would he verbalize?


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
