screen. Only her manservant (and former director) Max understands
       and loves Norma. The cynical media are there to exploit Norma’s new
       celebrity as a murderess. Again, the clash of the romantic and the cyn-
       ical raised the stakes for both Joe Gillis and Norma Desmond.
           In “The Apartment,” this polarity is represented by the romanticism
       of C.C. Baxter, who is naïve in believing that Kirkaby and Dobisch
       will advance his interests at work in return for using Baxter’s apartment
       after work, and by the cynicism of the executives, including Sheldrake.
       Their view that personal favors are the basis for advancement within
       the insurance company is a corrupt position that is supported by Fran’s
       later observation that there are two kinds of characters in life—those
168    who take and those who are taken. She views the executives as the tak-
       ers (cynical position) and herself and Baxter among the taken. Baxter
       as a character will turn against this Darwinian proposition and leave
       the corporate world (a romantic position) for his love of Fran. In “The
       Apartment,” the polarity between Baxter and the executives raises the
       stakes for each of his decisions. The environment in which Baxter
       finds himself is more than an economic or political environment;
       for Baxter, his moral choice at the end of the film is ultimately both
       economic and existential.
           The choice between the romantic and the cynical is never clearer
       than in “Double Indemnity.” Walter Neff pursues a romantic goal,
       Phyllis Dietrichson, while Phyllis pursues a cynical goal, the insurance
       money due her because of her husband’s accidental death. In the meet-
       ing scene, it is great fun to see Neff and Phyllis pursue their respective
       goals. He is blinded by desire, and she is blinded by dollar signs. Neither
       can really see the other. We see what is happening, but Neff doesn’t. As
       a result, we see a man destroy himself. To make this unsavory journey
       palatable, Wilder and fellow writer Raymond Chandler created a con-
       fessional narration. Neff confesses to his mentor, Barton Keyes, and to
       the audience. When he talks about being humiliated by Phyllis, his con-
       fession is a romantic device—“I was fooled by love, a blind man who
       couldn’t see it, but you could, Keyes, because you weren’t driven by the
       same feeling for Phyllis Dietrichson.”
           Wilder revisits this dichotomy in reverse in the second scene.
       This time, Neff is the cynic; he is at the Dietrichson house to tell
       her that she has failed in the insurance scam. She is going to be
       arrested, and he will be free of her. Phyllis, this time the romantic,
       shoots Neff but cannot kill him (she is in love, a revelation to her).


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
