Albert Remy as Antoine’s father in “The 400 Blows” offer credible
performances within the range of believability, whereas actors such
as Léaud only had to appear as themselves. The women performers
added the sparkle and raison d’être to feel romantic. They drive the
arc of each of these stories far more than do the men.
    Performance tended to fall into a narrow range for Truffaut. Type
was important and presence even more so. The charisma of the
female performers and their performances suggests an antidote to
the men who have taken on the acting style of a poseur. It is as if the
male characters are deciding when to rather than whether to change
direction. Changing direction from the drive of the narrative seems
to be the primary style to the performance of the men in the four         213
films we have been examining.


Directing the Camera

Truffaut, as a “New Wave” filmmaker, had a vested interest in being
innovative as a director and differing from the leaders of the French
film industry at the time who were considered stodgy and old fash-
ioned. Truffaut proved to be less eccentric than Louis Malle, and
not as cerebral as Jean-Luc Godard, nor was he as genre-centric as
Claude Chabrol. Instead he found his own way.
    Characteristic of Truffaut’s visual work was the use of the jump
cut rather than conventional pace devices in the editing of his films.
Truffaut used jump cuts throughout the discovery of the unfaithful
wife scene in “Stolen Kisses.” Rather than cutting continually to
close-ups of Antoine’s reaction to being duped by the private detec-
tive, the scene relies instead on jump cuts to put us in the position
of Antoine. The jump cuts create confusion and surprise, mimick-
ing how Antoine felt at that moment, and it creates the feeling with-
out resorting to the obvious, which would result from using the
editing convention of the close-up.
    Truffaut also used a moving camera freely but to different effect.
When Antoine practices detective work on a Paris street in “Stolen
Kisses,” we have the classic subjective movement throughout the
scene. Here, Antoine following a person and the inherent suspense
are treated ironically, as the woman realizes she has been followed
and alerts a policeman.


                                 François Truffaut: Celebrate the Child
