Moodysson also uses the jump cut to energize the narratives.
Jump cutting on hand-held movement in the opening of “Lilja
4-Ever” propels us into the story of a character we meet in motion.
The jump cutting gives us a sense of Lilja’s internal chaos and the
external violence of her life situation without spelling either out. The
soundtrack of “Together” makes the scene powerful and overwhelm-
ing. The jump cut makes an important contribution to that feeling.
    In “A Hole in My Heart,” the jump cut and the sense of a lack of
control implies the need for control in the lives of its four charac-
ters. Here, the jumps are disruptive rather than energizing. Also dis-
ruptive is Moodysson’s choice of straight cutting from scene to
scene. There is no softening via fades or dissolves. Blunt cutting         287
results in a few seconds’ lag before we begin to realize we are in a
different location with different characters.
    Finally, Moodysson is very sophisticated in his use of sound, par-
ticularly his juxtaposition of different types of music tracks. He
moves from hard rock to atonal music to bass ambient noise in the
opening of “A Hole in My Heart.” As in the case of jump cutting,
the result is disruptive and disorienting. In a sense, he is using a
sound jump cut. The overall feeling of the opening of “A Hole in
My Heart” is that we are caught in a series of MTV moments,
unreal in the feeling that they are manufactured. Given the subject
matter, the making of a porno film, this approach to the sound
design gives the film opening of “A Hole in My Heart” an artificial
feeling, a manufactured feeling. Like canned laughter on a televi-
sion sitcom, the sound design emphasizes the artificiality of the
experience to come. It does not come as a surprise that making the
film is not spiritually nurturing for any of the characters involved.
    Returning to the director’s idea of empathy and its limits, we can
see that Moodysson uses a variety of visual strategies to move us
closer to his characters and another series of visual and sound strate-
gies not so much to distance us as to alienate us, to move us into the
soft and sometimes intense contempt he feels toward the characters
and the situations they have placed themselves in. Both camera and
editing strategies are operating to draw us close (empathy) and repel
us (contempt). Quite where this young filmmaker will take us with
his fifth film is anybody’s guess. We look forward in eager anticipa-
tion to that next chapter.



                                 Lukas Moodysson: Empathy and Its Limits
