events and a sense that those events push, pull, bend, and break
      character include Michael Mann’s “The Insider,” Robert Aldrich’s
      “Attack,” David Lean’s “The Bridge Over the River Kwai,” and
      Henry Hathaway’s “The Lives of a Bengal Lancer.” Some directors
      are able to emphasize external action without sacrificing interior
      action. John Boorman’s “Point Blank” is an example of a powerful
      external–interior nexus. The film was remade by Brian Helgeland
      as “Payback,” a version that strictly opts for a more exterior read-
      ing of the story and suffers accordingly when compared to the
      original.

80
      Young/Old

      Age has often been used to set a tone for a reading. Conventionally,
      youth implies enthusiasm or optimism, and old age represents
      regret or reflection. This is the expected reading, but using the
      expected in unexpected ways has long yielded fresh results. Su
      Friedrich uses an adolescent narrator to communicate how arrested
      her character is in the autobiographical film “Sink or Swim.” This
      experimental narrative examination of a daughter/father relation-
      ship challenges the convention of expecting optimism from a
      “young” reading of the narrative. Similarly, numerous films, such as
      Martin Brest’s “Going in Style,” challenge the conventions of old
      age. This film focuses on senior citizens taking action to recapture
      youthful adventures and ambitions rather than being depressed
      about their age.
         Where the issue of text reading becomes interesting is when
      the story is told from a different perspective. Jane Smiley’s
      A Thousand Acres, based on King Lear but set in the modern
      Midwest, tells the story from the point of view of the daughter
      rather than the aging father, the point of view of the original. One
      can imagine Harper Lee’s To Kill a Mockingbird told from the
      point of view of the father, Atticus, rather than that of his preteen
      daughter. Or, consider Günter Grass’ novel, The Tin Drum, told
      from the points of view of both of Oscar’s fathers rather than from
      the point of view of Oscar.
         Whether one changes the perspective from young to old or from
      old to young, there is clear opportunity to make a melancholic


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
