Here comes that loaded term again, the competent director. In these
next three chapters I will chart the roadmap from competence in
directing to value (the good director) to transformation (the great
director). I know the term competent implies “not good enough,”
and I am willing to let that implication stand, even though it is not
intended. What is intended is for readers to use this chapter as a
baseline for determining what constitutes competent or good
enough directing. I could have as easily used the term technical
directing, but I did not want to confuse the subject of this chapter
with the specific role in television known as the technical or studio
director, the person who orchestrates the multicamera movements
in a live or taped television show, from news to sitcom. Keep in          25
mind, however, two other phrases—“technically proficient” and
“imaginatively understimulated”—to obtain a more layered sense of
what I mean by the competent director.


What the Audience Wants

Whether audiences visit movie theaters to be reassured or chal-
lenged, whether they seek the familiar or desire the unfamiliar, we
know that when they see a film they want more than the “Dragnet”
mantra of “just the facts, ma’am.” Whatever the genre, surprise, sub-
version, subtext, and style all enhance the film experience for the
film audience.
    We can formulate a set of guiding expectations that go beyond
the too general “escape from their own lives for two hours.” First, I
would suggest that audiences want a story well told. From the direc-
tor’s point of view that means narrative clarity. Two good examples
of directors who tell a complex story very clearly are Fred
Zinnemann in “The Day of the Jackal” (1977) and Robert Zemeckis
in “Back to the Future” (1983). Even good directors have lapses
when the story is far from clear. Sam Peckinpah loses narrative focus
in “Bring Me the Head of Alfredo Garcia” and in “The Osterman
Weekend.” Both films exemplify what the audience does not want.
    Genre acuity is the second goal for an audience. When they go
to a thriller they want to see a thriller, and when they go to a situa-
tion comedy they want to laugh. Sidney Pollack’s “Tootsie” (1982)
represents the kind of movie that audiences are looking for when


                                                 The Competent Director
