engaging. “The 400 Blows” is unquestionably a serious melodrama,
but it is also a film about a child who does not fit in. The genre of
melodrama simply would not work once Antoine became an adult;
consequently, Truffaut adopted a situation comedy approach to
“Stolen Kisses,” “Bed and Board,” and “Love on the Run.” He
treated Antoine as a character who simply does not fit into the adult
world but keeps trying.
    In dramatizing the two worlds—the child’s world and the adult
world—Truffaut put a positive spin on the child’s world and a less
appealing spin on the adult world. In “Stolen Kisses,” Antoine’s
youthful view of the world is illustrated by his playfulness with
regard to his feelings for Christine. Whenever they go to the wine             211
cellar in her parent’s home, he steals a kiss. When he practices for
his new profession of detective, he is again playful as he follows a
woman down the street. Adult life, however, is filled with unfaithful
people: Antoine bumps into Christine’s father when he visits a bor-
dello; Antoine’s client’s wife is more interested in the love-sick
Antoine than she is in her own husband. But, the characteristics of
adult life do not end with betrayal; for example, Antoine’s client
came to the detective agency to find out why people do not like
him. And, of course, there is death. The detective who first encour-
aged Antoine to come into the business drops dead as he is inter-
viewing a lead in his case.
    “Love on the Run” is also filled with a similar view of adult life.
Colette was sexually abused, her young daughter was killed in a car
accident, her marriage failed, and she does not trust the man she
loves. No less is the case with Antoine. He freely alters facts in
his book which he has passed off as autobiographical. He lies to his
girlfriend Sabine and is not forthcoming with his soon-to-be ex-wife
(the mother of his son). Antoine the adult can only be straightfor-
ward with his 10-year-old son. To be an adult is to be a liar, a cheat,
or at best disingenuous in all of one’s dealings. This is Truffaut’s
view of adult behavior.
    The schism is slightly different in “Day for Night.” Here, the
filmmaking is viewed as playful, and the behavior of all of the adults
involved is characterized as selfish and self-destructive. Filmmaking,
the act of making a fantasy manifest, is childlike, playful, and a
reconstruction of reality, whereas real life (adult life) is fully a failing
enterprise. I must point out that the theme of elevating the child and


                                   François Truffaut: Celebrate the Child
