an evening, it ends murderously when he kills one with a chain saw.
Patrick’s blood lust continues. He kills numerous low-level security
employees at work. He tries to sleep with his secretary, but cannot
do it. He lets her go. He breaks with his fiancée. He confesses mur-
der to his lawyer. Bloodlust and overwhelming turbulence bring
Patrick to the breaking point. By now Patrick is essentially in a state
of emotional collapse. When he tells his secretary that he cannot
come into the office that afternoon, she tells him that his colleagues
are expecting him to meet them for drinks after work. He does not
think he is up to it, but he does go. Meanwhile, his secretary looks
through Patrick’s desk and finds his personal diary. She is shocked
by the violent sketches it contains.                                       309
   At Harry’s Club, Patrick meets up with his colleagues. He seems
anxious and distracted. They are concerned about getting a reserva-
tion for dinner. When Patrick sees his lawyer, he approaches him, but
the lawyer mistakes him for David Van Patten, another client. Patrick
asks how he felt about his telephoned murder confession. The lawyer
says he was amused. Patrick tries to correct his identity and verify his
murderous activities, but the lawyer no longer thinks it is funny.
When Patrick persists the lawyer tells him that what he is saying is
untrue because he had dinner twice with Allen in London, only
10 days ago, after Patrick says he killed him. Patrick has no response.
   When he rejoins his friends, Patrick is clearly deflated. The film
ends on Paul’s self-deprecating inner monologue about no more
barriers to cross, about how his pain is constant and sharp and his
punishment continues to elude him. The confession has meant
nothing. Clearly, the murders have been fantasies and Patrick
Bateman’s life is empty if he cannot even be known (become a
celebrity) for the abundant violence he has committed.
   The opening of “American Psycho” introduces the environment,
a restaurant where status and taste outweigh human values. Here,
the characters are the expression of their menu choices and their
restaurant choices. Only later does the main character, Patrick
Bateman, introduce himself. He does so by introducing us to his
elegant apartment and his precise morning routine to hone his
physical appearance. He exercises and applies sundry lotions,
including an herb/mint facial mask. Patrick’s focus on brand-name
gels, scrubs, and cleansers implies, as he tells us, that “there is no
real me, I’m simply not there.”


                                     Mary Harron: Celebrity and Banality
