Inside Out

Here, observation is the key to preparing to develop a character. The
approach of acting from the inside out (what Stanislavsky called coher-
ence) has become the modus operandi for most schools of acting.
Strategies that connect an actor to his inner life, including possible
emotional memories associated with particular experiences, provide
the material necessary to understand and develop the character.
Improvisation, sense memory, and articulating inner experiences and
feelings with physical outward expressiveness are the mechanical
means of bringing out the inner “cohesiveness” to create a character.
                                                                           113

The American School

The American School of acting arose out of the Group Theater in
the 1930s and was very much influenced by Stanislavsky. American
School acting teachers created the famous “method” style of acting,
but within the school some acting teachers focused on memory—
specifically, to readers of this book, the recall of feelings associated
with specific events in their lives. These memories were the basis for
creating an actor’s character, both behaviorally and physically. As in
the work of Stanislavsky, the character should have a goal but it
need not be searching for the truth, although authenticity in the
creation of the character would be a form of truth.
    Stella Adler emphasized imagination. Adler promoted the use of
memories, feelings, impulses, and observations to create something
else—a character. Improvisation is an important tool for directly
accessing unconscious material that can be used to create a character.
    Sanford Meisner focused on repetition to create an immediate
“in the moment” experience. Putting an emphasis on what is going
on here and now and focusing on the people, places, and total envi-
ronment can help create an immediacy by virtue of the audience’s
reaction to the people and places. The surprise this behavior ellicits
invites spontaneous reaction. Energy, surprise, and a particular real-
ity are created before our eyes. This acting style is perhaps the most
active because it eschews reflection, while the styles of Adler and
Lee Strasberg focus on a character who is in relative terms more
developmental.

                                                                  The Actor
