requirements were limited. Performance expectations, however,
       changed considerably when it came to “Alexander Nevsky” and “Ivan
       the Terrible.” Eisenstein continued to rely on stereotypical casting for
       the secondary roles—the sturdy peasant, the aristocratic Teutonic
       knights, and the Russian traitor as weasel in “Alexander Nevsky”; the
       Boyar as overstuffed exploiter, scheming aristocrat, or cruel manipu-
       lator in “Ivan the Terrible.” But, for the major roles, Eisenstein turned
       to experienced theater actors who looked the part and could enhance
       their performance with a large inner passion. A specific example illus-
       trates the point. Eisenstein chose Nikolai Cherkassov, the leading
       Russian theater actor, for the parts of Alexander Nevsky and Ivan the
126    Terrible. The inner qualities of each character differ considerably
       from one another. First we turn to Alexander Nevsky.
           Eisenstein presents Nevsky in a very particular manner. Given the
       challenges Russia faces in the 13th century (such as invasions from
       the east and the west), Eisenstein wants to draw a particular quality
       from Cherkassov—the strength, determination, and self-confidence
       necessary to save Russia. Nevsky has to be convincing as the savior of
       Mother Russia, and Cherkassov is very convincing as Nevsky. Beyond
       the actor’s towering presence and bearing, Eisenstein places him in
       narrative circumstances that illustrate different dimensions of the
       Nevsky character. In the scene that introduces Nevsky, he is shown
       fishing at a time of war. He is presented either in the foreground or
       alone. The other fishermen are clustered or positioned in a seated
       position. The character’s superiority is apparent. Later in the same
       scene, a group of Mongols attacks his fellow fishermen when they are
       not sufficiently humble in the presence of the Mongols. Nevsky not
       only stops the fight but also attracts the attention of the leader of the
       Mongol party. Taller and insisting on freedom (and dignity) for his
       fishermen, Nevsky listens to the Mongol leader rattle off Nevsky’s
       accomplishments (e.g., the general who defeated the Swedes) and
       rejects an offer by the Mongol leader to join their army with rank and
       privileges commensurate with his achievements. The Mongols leave.
           One of the fishermen suggests Nevsky lead his people against the
       Mongols. Nevsky says not yet, as the risk is greater in the west. They
       must fight the Germans and prevent them from taking Novgorod,
       a Russian city that is their next goal. In his declaration, Nevsky assumes
       the mantle of a Russian leader, but it is only later in battle that we see
       another dimension of Nevsky—his skills and risk-taking in battle.


  The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
