Sean Penn, and Angelica Huston have all directed films, and the
trend will only continue to grow. It must not be forgotten that Elia
Kazan and Mike Nichols began their careers as performers and both
went on to exceptional careers as directors. Understanding that
characters change, how they change, and who they become (in
essence, the character arc) is an advantage for actors who become
directors. The philosophies of acting they use might differ, but the
end result is the same—a living, lively, engaging portrayal of a char-
acter that grips the audience. We turn now to those philosophies of
acting that actors use and directors should understand.

                                                                           111
Philosophies of Acting

Philosophies of acting have generally arisen from theater perfor-
mance rather than film or the media. Ideas about acting revolu-
tionized by a Russian, Konstantin Stanislavsky, have been adapted
in, for example, Great Britain, France, Germany, and the United
States. Before discussing these ideas, however, it must be noted that
their underpinnings are the 19th- and 20th-century advances made
in our understanding of human behavior, principally cognitive psy-
chology and psychoanalysis, fields that are concerned with the skin
and subcutaneous layers of human behavior. These ideas quickly
made their way into literature, the visual arts, design, and theater. It
is not surprising that the contradictions and conflicts inherent to the
outer and inner lives of a character became the focus of first play-
wrights, then directors and acting coaches. For each, the instrument
that illustrated the conflict was the actor. How to bring the actor
into a state of immediacy became the focus of ideas about acting for
the next hundred years. It remains the focus today.
    In order to understand the philosophies of acting that prevail
today it is important to go to the source, Konstantin Stanislavsky, the
Russian director and theoretician of acting. His work on the inter-
pretation of the Russian playwright Anton Chekhov crystallized his
ideas about acting. Today’s ideas about acting differ only in their
emphasis. (A good elaboration of these ideas is David Richard
Jones’ Great Directors at Work, University of California Press, 1986.)
Stanislavsky felt that acting should be directed toward uncovering or
revealing certain universals: the human spirit, or nature, and above


                                                                  The Actor
