get by and to get your way. It is here on the matter of history that the
sisters differ.

“Rosenstrasse” (2004)
The last film we will focus on is “Rosenstrasse.” Earlier in the chap-
ter I described the narrative, the story of three women—the
contemporary story of Hannah Weinstein (Maria Schrader); the
1943 story of Ruth Weinstein (Jutta Lampe), Hannah’s mother; and
the 1943 story of Lena Fischer (Katja Riemann), the gentile woman
who rescues Ruth. Each of these women suffers a loss that ruptures
her life. That historical loss is directly embedded in the historical
plot, the war against the Jews. Can a gentile save a Jew? In the con-      267
temporary story, that gentile is Lena. Hannah, a young woman, is
disturbed by her mother’s rejection of her gentile fiancé, Luis. If she
can discover her mother’s history perhaps she can move forward.
Lena, now 90, tells Hannah about her mother, Ruth’s wartime
personal history. The second story is about Ruth as a child. Early in
the film she loses her mother in a Berlin sweep of Jews. A young
man pulls the Jewish star from Ruth’s vest and following her
mother’s advice she asks a gentile woman outside Gestapo head-
quarters to take care of her. The German women gathered there
have Jewish husbands who have also been rounded up. It is Lena
who saves Ruth. The third story, also set in 1943, is Lena’s story.
From a noble family, Lena has chosen to marry Fabian, a Jewish
musician. She and Fabian were a creative couple—she on the piano
and Fabian playing the violin. Lena also was a Von Essenbach, the
daughter of long-standing respected German aristocrats. She suf-
fered her father’s rejection for her marriage to a Jew. When Fabian
is picked up in the 1943 sweep of Jews, he is taken to a Gestapo
holding area on Rosenstrasse. Lena and other gentile wives of
Jews protest in front of the building. She appeals to her family to
intercede but her father remains intransigent. She is no longer his
daughter. Only her war-injured officer brother tries to help her. She
finally offers herself to the SS leadership to secure Fabian’s release.
In the end, her efforts bear results. She secures his release together
with that of many other Jewish husbands of gentile wives.
    In “Rosenstrasse,” we focus on the 1943 relationships of Lena
with her husband, Fabian, and with the young Ruth. In these
scenes, Von Trotta is interested in creating the motivation for Lena,


  Margarethe Von Trotta: Historical Life and Personal Life Intersect
