world that does not accept them, and the results are often tragic.
      The search for a state of grace is Scorsese’s director’s idea.
          This director’s idea is clearly at play in Scorsese’s “The Last
      Temptation of Christ” (1987) and “Kundun” (1999), his film about
      the life of the Dalai Lama. In a more subtle way, it is the subtext of
      Jake LaMotta’s journey in “Raging Bull” (1980) and Travis Bickle’s
      search in “Taxi Driver” (1976). The casting of Robert De Niro in
      both roles further underscores the restless, searching inner life that
      amplifies the director’s idea.
          Much has been made of the tone of Scorsese’s films. Implicit in
      his director’s idea is the clash between what the character wants and
62    what the character gets. It has been said that Scorsese has a propen-
      sity for creating film noir, but I believe this not to be the case. The
      tone is dark in “Taxi Driver,” “Mean Streets” (1973), and “Casino”
      (1995), but I believe that the darkness has more to do with the
      narrative outcomes than a deliberate attempt to produce film noir.
      In “Raging Bull,” for example, LaMotta is no longer a champion.
      He has lost his family due to continual wife battering and is alone.
      We see him rehearsing a monologue for a nightclub routine and
      realize that he is a man exploiting his own fame and former glory to
      make money to pay off his debts. In this scene, Scorsese presents
      a man who has fallen from the state of grace he enjoyed within
      the aesthetic of combat in the ring. That was LaMotta’s moment,
      and when he lost it he was set adrift in the material world. This
      is LaMotta’s tragedy. He has fallen from that state of grace that
      allowed him to associate with something larger than life. The ring,
      the combat, and being the middleweight champion meant every-
      thing to him.
          Another aspect of Scorsese’s work needs to be addressed—his
      style. Scorsese uses an active, searching, moving camera, such as in
      the nightclub entry shot in “Goodfellas” (1990), the balletic tracking
      shots in “Raging Bull,” and the dynamic preparation for battle shots
      in “Gangs of New York” (2002). Scorsese uses the camera, together
      with chiaroscuro lighting, to create energy and to imply the restless
      search. The energy is the desire, the moving camera the hope, and
      the lighting the anxiety that hope will be dashed and desire will be
      disappointed. This stylistic approach underpins the director’s idea. It
      articulates how very much the character hopes he will find a state of
      grace, and the use of lighting indicates how difficult the goal truly is.


 The Director’s Idea: The Path to Great Directing
