the commune. They seem the most antisocial of the group, always
complaining about the behavior of others.
    When Elisabeth and her children arrive, the others are gathered in
the living room arguing about personal versus collective rights. Lasse
is outraged that his ex-wife, Anna, stands around with no pants, dress,
or underwear and is naked from the navel down. He is distracted by
her state of undress. She asserts that a fungal infection has dictated her
state of undress. This is her interpretation of freedom, but Lasse feels
imprisoned by her freedom. Elisabeth and the children are shocked.
    The film follows the conservative Elisabeth as she tries to adjust
to her new life. Anna pursues her as does her husband, Rolf. Her
children try to adjust, Eva finding a male friend next door. They are        279
alike because of the thickness of their eyeglasses and their eccentric
tastes in music. Stefan wants his father back. Lasse wants Anna
back. Klas wants Lasse. Lena wants Eric, and so it goes. In the
course of the story the collective characters become more individu-
alistic, and the individualistic or conservative characters become
more collective. Elisabeth and Rolf get back together and leave the
commune. Lasse and Anna get back together. Göran throws the self-
serving Lena out. The collective falls apart. The sequence we will
focus on is the opening, which energetically introduces all the char-
acters, their agendas, and their conflicts. As in “Fucking Åmål,”
Moodysson quickly focuses on his characters and juggles multiple
story lines. Rather than confusing us, the multiple story lines clash
and energize the charming set of characters of “Together.”

“Lilja 4-Ever” (2002)
“Lilja 4-Ever” is an altogether different kind of story. The first half
of the film is set in contemporary Russia, the second half in
Sweden. After a prologue in Sweden, the film opens as a mother
announces to the 15-year-old Lilja (Oksana Akinshina) that she is
leaving for the United States with her new husband. She will send
for Lilja when she is settled. Having been abandoned by her
mother, Lilja is promptly thrown out of her apartment by her aunt.
She must live in a run-down apartment, and the aunt will live in
what was Lilja’s apartment.
   The school front is no better. Lilja walks out of school angry at all
adults, but primarily her teacher. The friend situation is little better.
The boys see all girls as hookers and act accordingly. A girlfriend


                                  Lukas Moodysson: Empathy and Its Limits
